On the Limitations and

Dangers of Psychology

191

The growing popularity of psychology in our day is greeted
by many as a promising sign of our approaching the realization of the Delphic postulate "Know thyself." Undoubtedly
there is some reason for this interpretation. The idea of selfknowledge has its roots in the Greek and Judaeo-Christian
tradition. It is part of the Enlightenment attitude.

James
and Freud were deeply rooted in this tradition, and undoubtedly they have helped to transmit this positive
aspect of psychology to our present era. But this fact must
not lead one to ignore other aspects of the contemporary
interest in psychology which are dangerous

and destruc-

tive to the spiritual development of man. It is with these

aspects that the present chapter deals.

ERICH FROMM

192

Psychological knowledge (Menschenkenntnis] has assumed a particular function in capitalistic society, a function

and a meaning quite different from the meanings

implied in "Know thyself."
Capitalistic society is centered around the market

the

commodity market and the labor market where goods
and services are exchanged freely, regardless of traditional
standards and without force or fraud. Instead, knowledge
of the customer becomes of paramount importance for the
seller. If this was true even fifty or a hundred years
ago,
the knowledge of the customer has increased in signifi-

cance a hundredfold in recent decades. With the growing
concentration of enterprises and capital, it becomes ever
more important to know in advance the wishes of the
customer, not only to know them but also to influence and
manipulate them. Capital investment on the scale of
modern giant enterprises are made not by "hunch," but
after thorough investigation and manipulation of the cus-

tomer. Beyond this knowledge of the customer ("market
psychology"), a new field of psychology has arisen, based

on the wish to understand and manipulate the worker and
the employee. This new field is called "human relations."
It is a logical outcome of the

changed relationship between

capital and labor. Instead of crude exploitation there is
co-operation between the giant colossi of enterprise and

the labor-union bureaucracy, both of whom have come to
the conclusion that in the long run it is more useful to
arrive at compromises than to fight each other. In addition,
however, one has also found that a satisfied, "happy"
worker works more productively and contributes more to

the smooth operation which is a necessity for today's

large

enterprise. Using the popular interest in psychology and
in human relations, the worker and
are studied

employee

On the Limitations and Dangers of Psychology

193

and manipulated by psychologists. What Taylor did for
the rationalization of physical work, the psychologists are

doing for the mental and emotional aspect of the worker.

The worker is made into a thing and is treated and manipulated like a thing, and the so-called 'Iranian relations" are
actually the most inhuman ones because they are "reified"
and alienated relations.

From the manipulation of the customer and the worker
and the employee, the interest of psychology has spread
to the manipulation of everybody, as is most clearly ex-

pressed in politics. The idea of democracy was originally
centered around the concept of clear-thinking and responsible citizens, but in practice, democracy has become more
and more influenced by the methods of manipulation
which were first developed in market research and 'Tiuman

relations."

Though all this is well known, I want now to discuss a
more subtle and difficult problem, which is related to the
interest in individual psychology, especially to the great

To what
popularity of psychoanalysis. The question is:
extent is psychology (the knowledge of others and of
oneself) possible? What limitations exist to such knowledge, and what are the dangers if these limitations are not

respected?

Undoubtedly the desire to know our fellow men and
ourselves corresponds to a deep need in human beings.
Man lives within a social context. He needs to be related
to his fellow man lest he become insane. Man is endowed

with reason and imagination. His fellow man and he himself constitute a problem which he cannot help trying to
solve, a secret which he must try to discover.
The endeavor to understand man by thought is called
"psychology"

"the knowledge of the soul." Psychology, in

ERICH FRO MM

194

attempts to understand the forces underlying
man's behavior, the evolution of man's character, and the
circumstances determining this evolution. In short, psyof the innermost
chology tries to give a rational account
core of an individual soul. But complete rational knowlthis sense,

can be dissected
edge is possible only of things; things
be
can
without being destroyed, they
manipulated without
damage to their very nature, they can be reproduced.
Man is not a thing; he cannot be dissected without being

he cannot be manipulated without being
harmed, and he cannot be reproduced artificially. We
know our fellow man and ourselves, yet we do not know
either him or ourselves because we are not a thing, and

destroyed,

our fellow man is not a thing. The further we reach into
the depth of our own being or someone else's being, the
more the goal of full knowledge eludes us. Yet we cannot
into the secret of man's soul,
help desiring to penetrate
"he."
is
which
nucleus
into the
What, then, is knowing ourselves or knowing another

means

know ourselves
person? Briefly speaking, to
overcome the illusions we have about ourselves; to know
to

our neighbor means to overcome the "parataxic distortions" (transference) we have about him. We all suffer,
in varying degrees, from illusions about ourselves.

We are

enmeshed in fantasies of our omniscience and omnipotence which were experienced as quite real when we were
children; we rationalize our bad motivations as being born
of benevolence, duty, or necessity; we rationalize our weakness and fear as being in the service of good causes, our
unrelatedness as resulting from the unresponsiveness of
others. With our fellow man we distort and rationalize
as much, except that usually we do so in the opposite
just
direction. Our lack of love makes him appear as hostile

On the Limitations and Dangers of Psychology

195

when he is merely shy; our submissiveness transforms him
into a dominating ogre when he is simply asserting himself;

our fear of spontaneity makes him out to be childish

when he is really childlike and spontaneous.
To know more about ourselves means to do away with
the many veils that hide us, and make it impossible to see
our neighbors clearly. One veil after another is lifted, one
distortion after another dispelled.

Psychology can show us what man is not. It cannot tell
what man, each one of us, is. The soul of man, the
unique core of each individual, can never be grasped and
described adequately. It can be '"known" only inasmuch as
it is not misconceived. The
legitimate aim of psychology
thus is the negative, the removal of distortions and illusions, not the positive, the full and complete knowledge
us

of a human being.

There is, however, another path to knowing man's secret; this

path is not that of thought but that of love.

Love is active penetration of the other person, in which the

know is stilled by union.

(This is love in the
biblical meaning of daath as against ahaba. ) In the act of

desire to

fusion I know you, I know myself, I know everybody
I "know" nothing. I

and

know in the only way in which knowl-

edge of that which is alive is possible for man by the experience of union, not by any knowledge our thought can
lies in the act of love;
give. The only way to full knowledge
this act transcends thought, it transcends words. It is the

daring plunge into the essence of another or my own.
for full
Psychological knowledge may be a condition

knowledge in the act of love. I have to know the other
able to see
person and myself objectively in order to be
his reality, or, rather, in order to ovecome the illusions, the
I have of him. If I know a
irrationally distorted picture

ERICH FROMM

196

human being as he is, or, rather, if I know what he is not,
then I may know him in his ultimate essence, through the
act of love.

Love is an achievement not easy to attain. How does the

man who cannot love try to penetrate the secret of his
a

one, to

get
desperate
neighbor? There is one other way,
to know the secret: it is that of complete power over anwhich makes him do what I want,
the
other
person;

power

feel what I want, think what I want; which transforms him

into a thing,

my thing, my possession. The ultimate degree

of this attempt to know lies in the extreme of sadism, in the
suffer, to torture him, to
desire to make a human

being

force him to betray his "secret" in his suffering, or eventu-

him. In the craving to penetrate man's
ally to destroy
secret lies an essential motivation for the depth and in-

and destructiveness. In a very succinct
Russian writer
way this idea has been expressed by the
Russian civil
the
in
officer
fellow
a
He
Babel
Isaac
quotes
to death, as
master
a
former
war, who had just stamped
with
I'll
shooting
put it this way
saying: 'With shooting
tensity of cruelty

With shooting you 11 never
you only get rid of a chap.
a fellow and how it shows
is
in
it
to
where
the
at
soul,
get
itself. But I don't spare myself, and I've more than once
hour. You see, I want to
trampled an enemy for over an
what life's like down our
get to know what life really is,
.

.

.

*

way."
Yet, while sadism and destructiveness are motivated by
the desire to force man's secret, this way can never lead to

the desired goal. By making my neighbor suffer, the distance between him and myself grows to a point where no
1 "The Life and Adventures of Matthew Pavlichenko/' Isaac Babel,
The Collected Stories, ed. and trans, by Walter Morison (New York:

Criterion Books, Inc., 1955), p. 106.

On the Limitations and Dangers of Psychology

197

knowledge is any longer possible. Sadism and destructiveness are perverted, hopeless, and tragic attempts to know
man.2

The problem of knowing man is parallel to the theological problem of knowing God. Negative theology postulates

that I cannot make any positive statement about God. The

only knowledge of God is what He is not. As Maimonides
put it, the more I know about what God is not, the more I

know about God. Or as Meister Eckhart put it: "Meanwhile man cannot know what God is even though he be
ever so well aware of what God is not." One consequence
of such negative theology is mysticism. If I can have no
full knowledge of God in thought, if theology is at best

negative, the positive knowledge of God can be achieved
only in the act of union with God.

Translating this principle to the field of man's soul, we
might speak of a "negative psychology," and furthermore

say that full knowledge of man by thought is impossible,
and that full "knowledge" can occur only in the act of love.
is a
logical consequence of negative
love
is the
theology,
logical consequence of negative psy-

Just as mysticism

chology.
Stating the limitations of psychology is to point to the
danger resulting from ignoring these limitations. Modern

man is lonely, frightened, and little capable of love. He
wants to be close to his neighbor, yet he is too unrelated
and distant to be able to be close. His marginal bonds to
In children we often see this path to knowledge quite overtly, and as
a part of the normal desire of the child to orient himself in a world of
it
up in orphysical reality. The child takes something apart and breaks
a
der to know it; or it takes an animal
cruelly tears off the wings of
2

apart;

its secret. The apparent cruelty itmotivated by something deeper: the wish to know the secret of

butterfly in order to know it, to force
self is

things and of life.

ERICH FROMM

198

his neighbor are manifold and easily kept up, but a "central

relatedness," that from core to core, hardly exists. In search
of closeness he wants knowledge; and in search of knowl-

edge he finds psychology. Psychology becomes a substitute
for love, for intimacy, for union with others and oneself;
it becomes the
refuge for the lonely, alienated man, rather
than a step toward the act of union.
This function of psychology as a surrogate becomes
apparent in the phenomenon of the popularity of psychoanalysis. Psychoanalysis can be most helpful in undoing
the parataxic distortions within ourselves and about our
fellow man. It can undo one illusion after another, and

thus free the way to the decisive act which we alone can

perform: the "courage to be," the jump, the act of ultimate
commitment. Man, after his physical birth, has to undergo
a continuous process of birth. Emerging from mother's
womb is the first stage of birth; from her breast is the
second; from her arm, the third. From here on, the process
of birth can stop; the person may develop into a socially
adjusted and useful person and yet remain stillborn in a
spiritual sense. If he is to develop into what he potentially

a human being, he must continue to be born; that is,
he must continue to dissolve the primary ties to soil and
blood. He must proceed from one act of separation to the
next. He must give up certainty and defenses, and take the
jump into the act of commitment, concern, and love. What
is as

happens so often in psychoanalytic treatment is that there
agreement between therapist and patient, in the
assumption that psychoanalysis is a method by which one
can attain happiness and maturity and yet avoid the jump,

is a silent

the act, the pain of separation. To carry the

analogy of the

jump a little further, the psychoanalytic situation looks
sometimes like that of a man wanting to learn how to swim,

On the Limitations and Dangers of Psychology

199

yet being terrified of the moment when he has to jump
into the water and have faith in its carrying power. He
stands at the edge of the pool and listens as his teacher
explains the movements he must make; that is good and
necessary; but if we see him going on, talking, listening,
talking, we become suspicious that the talking and understanding have become a substitute for the dreaded act.

No amount or depth of psychological insight can ever take
the place of the act, of the commitment, of the jump. It

can lead to it, prepare it, make it possible and this is the
legitimate function of psychoanalytic work. But it must
not try to be a substitute for the responsible act of commitment, an act without which no real change occurs in
a human being.

psychoanalysis is understood in this sense, another
condition must be met. The analyst must overcome the
If

alienation from himself and from his fellow man which is

modern man. As I have indicated before,
modern man experiences himself as a thing, as an embodiment of energies to be invested profitably on the market.

prevalent in

He experiences his fellow man as a thing to be used for
Contemporary psychology, psychiaand psychoanalysis are involved in this universal
as a thing,
process of alienation. The patient is considered

profitable exchange.
try,

as the sum of many parts. Some of these parts are defective

and need to be repaired, as the parts of an automobile
need to be repaired. There is a defect here and a defect
there, called symptoms, and the psychiatrist considers it his
function to repair or correct these various defects. He does
not look at the patient as a global, unique totality which

can be fully understood only in the act of full relatedness

and empathy. If psychoanalysis is to fulfill its real possibilities, the analyst must overcome his own alienation,

ERICH FROMM

200

must be capable of relating himself to the patient from core
to core, and in this relatedness to open the path for the
patient's spontaneous experience and thus for the "understanding" of himself. He must not look on the patient as
an object, or even only be a "participant observer"; he
must become one with him and at the same time retain
his separateness and objectivity, so that he can formulate
what he experiences in this act of oneness. The final understanding cannot be expressed fully in words; it is not
an "interpretation," which describes the patient as an object with various defects, and explains their genesis, but it
is an intuitive
grasp. It takes place first in the analyst

and then, if the analysis is to be successful, in the patient.
This grasp is sudden; it is an intuitive act which can be
prepared by many cerebral insights but can never be replaced by them. If psychoanalysis is to develop in this
direction, it has, still, unexhausted possibilities for human
transformation and spiritual change. If it remains en-

meshed in the socially patterned defect of alienation, it
may remedy this or that defect, but it will only become another tool for making man more automatized and more
adjusted to an alienated society.

