This paper, which was first published in Existential Analysis 14.2 July
2003, is displayed here by kind permission of the author.
Existentialism, Humanism and Psychotherapy
By Daniel Burston, Ph.D.
Abstract
Authors of American psychology textbooks habitually refer to the
“existential-humanistic” or “humanistic-existential” approach to treatment,
while therapists in the UK and Europe say that this usage is inaccurate, and that
the differences between the existential and humanistic approaches outweigh
their similarities. To assess the merit of these competing claims, we must
distinguish between literary and philosophical humanism, which is European in
origin, and humanistic psychology, which is a recent American innovation.
Having carefully discriminated between the two, it transpires that the similarities
between the two approaches are often greater than Europeans concede, but also
less than many Americans imagine. The fact that existential psychotherapy in
Europe precedes American humanistic psychology by more than two decades
entitles existential psychotherapists outside the USA to insist on the uniqueness
and specificity of their approach.
Consult almost any textbook on Abnormal Psychology in the United
States and you will discover that existential psychotherapy and humanistic
psychology are viewed as kindred approaches to treatment here. Under the
heading of “Models of Mental Disorder”, often in the first few chapters, one
generally finds the “humanistic-existential ” or “existential-humanistic” model
discussed alongside of the cognitive, behavioral psychodynamic and
sociocultural approaches. Meanwhile, in the UK and Europe, the existential and
humanistic approaches are considered very different, the former originating on
European soil, the latter being a recent American import regarded warily at best
(e.g. Spinelli, 1989). The recent debate between John Rowan and Ernesto
Spinelli in The Handbook of Humanistic Psychology (Schneider, K., Bugenthal, J. &
Pierson, J.F., eds. 2001) indicates just how deep and convoluted these
disagreements have become. While Rowan is eager to deny any fundamental
differences, arguing that “we should talk all the time about existentialhumanistic psychotherapy” (p. 448), Spinelli replies that American psychologists
are profoundly mistaken, and that we must make clear conceptual distinctions
between the existential and humanistic approaches to psychotherapy.
Some would argue that this spirited disagreement only concerns a handful
of psychotherapy practitioners. But beyond that, everyone who reads, writes or
309

uses Abnormal Psychology textbooks for instructional purposes and is sensitive
to issues of cultural difference has a stake in this discussion too. Why? Because
if Rowan is right, we North Americans are justified in speaking of an
“existential-humanistic” approach to therapy, and should continue to do so in
future. But if Spinelli is right, “existential-humanistic psychotherapy” is really an
American hybrid with no counterparts elsewhere around the world. If that is so,
in the interests of accuracy, we must expunge the term from our textbooks, or
confine such usage to the description of American psychology alone.
Before we tackle these issues directly, it is instructive to note that there are
good historical reasons for these divergent cultural perspectives. And as a result
there is a lot of confusion abroad about the exact meaning of terms like
“existentialism”, “humanism” and “humanistic psychology”, and the areas of
convergence, overlap and/or dissimilarity between them. This confusion is
intensified by the fact that some psychologists in America used one term to
modify the other for descriptive purposes. Thus, in the 1950’s, for example,
Erich Fromm used the phrase “existential humanism” to characterize his
particular orientation (Fromm, 1955; Burston 1991), while Hazel Barnes
referred to the “humanistic existentialism” of Jean-Paul Sartre, among others
(Barnes, 1959). And following in the footsteps of Rollo May, (an analysand of
Fromm’s, as well as a pupil of Paul Tillich, incidentally), James Bugenthal, first
President of the Association for Humanistic Psychology, authored an influential
book entitled Psychotherapy and Process: The Fundamentals of An ExistentialHumanistic Approach in 1978.
Unfortunately, terms like “humanism” and “existentialism” often acquire
culturally and historically specific meanings for those who use them, so that
perfect clarity or unanimity with respect to their “real” meaning could remain
elusive. Nevertheless, the effort to clarify what these terms have meant
historically is valuable, because it illumines what these words mean to individual
practitioners, and why. Which brings us to our first question, namely; what is
existentialism?
Basically, existentialism is an approach to philosophy and psychotherapy
which says that our disparate social and historical situations, differences in age,
gender, ability and so on, all of us, by virtue of being human , and conscious of
our inevitable death, partake of the same basic structures of existence, and a
need to confer value and to impart meaning to life through action and decision.
The way in which existence is structured into different modes or structures of
possibility -- i.e. authentic and inauthentic modes of being (Kierkegaard,
Heidegger); the “being” and “having” modes (Marcel, Fromm); being "in itself",
"for itself" and "for others", (Hegel, Sartre); or various modes of relatedness to others
(Buber, Binswanger, Fromm) -- varies significantly from one theorist to
310

another. But the underlying premises about the human condition, and the
pervasive threats to human dignity, autonomy and solidarity with others are
often strikingly similar. So despite a plurality of approaches and ideas here, it is
possible to discern a kind of meta-theoretical consensus about certain fundamentals
that place existentialist psychotherapists in the same universe of discourse
(Burston, 2000, chapter 2).
When did existentialism begin? That is more difficult to answer. Though
Jaspers and Heidegger were already talking about a philosophy of existenz
during World War I, the term “existentialism” was actually coined later, by a
French journalist who was interviewing Sartre in 1941 . Sartre liked the label,
which gained popularity, and by the end of World War II, was being applied to a
wide range of thinkers, not all of whom welcomed this avant garde designation.
Theologians Paul Tillich and Gabriel Marcel embraced it enthusiastically. But
Martin Buber acknowledged his affinities with others who bore this label quite
reluctantly, and always emphasized the uniqueness of his own point particular of
view. And strangest of all, perhaps, Martin Heidegger rejected the label
completely, though his name and ideas figure prominently in every anthology or
historical overview of existential philosophy and psychotherapy.
So existentialism is no stranger to mystery or paradox. On the contrary, it
makes a generous allowance for their presence in human affairs, and has to, to
make some sense of its own murky origins. For confusion about who is (or is
not) an existentialist deepened, rather than dissipated, as the 20th century wore
on. The term “existentialism” grew even more popular during the fifties and
sixties, as Sartre and de Beauvoir’s novels and plays enthralled audiences on
both sides of the Atlantic. Because of their prodigious literary efforts, other
literary figures, including Dostoyevsky, Baudelaire, Kafka , Gide and Rilke were
soon embraced by members of the movement as forerunners or fellow travelers.
So on reflection, there has never been a stable or binding consensus regarding
the leadership or the terms of membership in the existentialist movement, nor
precisely when it took root historically.
To trace the existential lineage as far back as possible, we could follow
Paul Tillich and Rollo May, and begin with Blais Pascal, whom I call a protoexistentialist . For the sake of clarity and convenience, I will defer to the
prevailing consensus, and date the origins of existentialism to Kierkegaard and
Nietzsche. But that raises the question: why do we customarily begin with
them?
To get this matter into historical perspective, remember that in medieval
times, philosophy was considered the handmaiden of theology, and only
emancipated herself from her subservient role through long and strenuous
effort. Initially, the growth of the natural sciences contributed to her growing
autonomy. After all, by the mid- 19th century, the astounding growth of the
311

natural sciences had shattered what little was left of the old scholastic synthesis,
and promised to confer many moral and material blessings on believers in the
new cult of “Progress”.
Unfortunately, by this time, however, philosophy’s erstwhile ally was
threatening to turn into a new oppressor, as positivists proposed that
philosophy had been freed from fealty to theology to assume her true historic
mission, which was to be a handmaiden to the natural sciences. Kierkegaard and
Nietzsche were two notable thinkers who refused positivism’s stifling embrace,
and argued that the real goals of philosophy, namely, self knowledge and
freedom, are not to be found on this path , and that the apparent gains afforded
by modern science and “progress” generally mask alarming trends toward
conformity, banality and other deformations of the human spirit.
By the late twenties and early thirties, European psychiatrists who were
inspired by existentialism started to create a new approach to the study and
treatment of mental disorder called Daseinsanalysis, existential analysis, or
existential psychotherapy. Some, like Karl Jaspers, were philosophers-turnedpsychiatrists. Others, like Ludwig Binswanger, Medard Boss, Viktor Frankl and
R.D.Laing, among others, were erstwhile psychoanalysts who left the Freudian
fold because they were dissatisfied with its blind allegiance to the natural
scientific account of the mind. It was only after the Second World War, in the
late 1950’s, that Rollo May joined with Ernst Angel and Ludwig Binswanger’s
remarkable pupil, Henri Ellenberger , to introduce Americans to existential
psychiatry in the ground-breaking anthology Existence , which became a huge
best seller just when humanistic psychology was beginning to take root here
(May,R., Angel, E., & Ellenberger, H., 1958).
If existential psychotherapy germinated in Europe during the Weimar
period, humanistic psychology took root in the United States in the Cold War
era. Though somewhat difficult to define, it can be described as a broad
spectrum of approaches to treatment that arose here as a spirited challenge to
the rival orthodoxies of Freudian theory, which dominated psychiatry, and
behaviorism, which dominated psychology.
In fairness to all concerned, psychoanalysis and behaviorism have since
moved on, and have long since ceded their hegemonic control of the mental
health professions in the USA to cognitivism and psychopharmacology. But to
its credit, at its inception, humanistic psychology reproached both
psychoanalysis and behaviorism with 1) excessively mechanistic and
deterministic accounts of the origins and meaning of human behavior, and 2)
with doctrinal rigidity and narrowness , and tendencies toward reification, depersonalization, intellectualization and excessive ritualism in the therapeutic
encounter between clinicians and patients. And in this, of course, they
resembled their existentialist counterparts considerably.
312

However, despite the convergent tone of their critiques, one striking
difference between the two groups was that existential therapists, for the most
part, were psychiatrists, while their humanistic counterparts in America were
mostly psychologists. Rollo May tried to bridge this gap by founding the Journal
of Existential Psychology and Psychiatry in 1959, and was partially successful, for a
time. Another difference, which was related to the former one, was that the antiFreudian rhetoric that prevailed among humanistic psychologists in the sixties
and seventies was considered quite excessive by many Europeans, even among
those who cherished profound reservations about Freud’s theory and therapy.
Judging from recent transatlantic debates, however, this venerable bone
of contention has lost all of its former urgency. Other issues have taken
precedence, such as the status of the “real” self, the notion of “selfactualization”, the pursuit of wholeness, congruence, and so on. But let us be
frank. Despite these (and other) differences which Spinelli, in particular, lays so
much emphasis on (e.g. Spinelli, 1989), the fact remains that existential analysis
and humanistic psychology do have much in common. Consider their
approaches to symptom removal. The medical model and behaviorist
approaches regard a symptom of “mental disorder” as a form of needless
suffering that should be mitigated or removed as quickly and as painlessly as
possible. While the patient’s co-operation is necessary, of course, the technical
procedures involved here depend primarily on the knowledge and the agency of
the therapist/expert.
From the existential and humanistic standpoints, by contrast, the
suffering caused by a patient’s “symptomatology” represents an occasion, and
indeed, an opportunity, for “soul searching” and earnest reflection in what must
soon become a collaborative search or struggle to elucidate and restore a
measure of meaning that was somehow lost or obscured in the person’s struggle
to adapt to adverse circumstances . Though not couched in a religious idiom , of
course, this means that suffering may have a “redemptive” function, pointing
the person toward a more authentic, integrated existence, rather than being a
mere nuisance to be eliminated so he (or she) can get on with the real business
of living. If anything, in fact, from both the existential and humanistic
perspective, the reverse is usually true, since it is our (deliberate or inadvertent)
neglect of “the real business of living” that the symptom calls attention to in the
first place! Furthermore, as regards treatment, while the therapist’s training and
experience are crucial to the therapeutic encounter, the patient’s agency and/or
willingness to enter into a genuine dialogue with the therapist are of equal or
greater importance in the long run. Their willingness to take responsibility for
their own lives, ultimately, is also key.
Second, note that existential psychotherapy and humanistic psychology
share a core conviction that they bring to bear on psychotherapy practice,
313

namely, the role of self-authorship or self-determination in the formation of our
character and conduct. According to this view, we are never entirely determined
by our past experiences. Personal choice plays a significant role in who we are
and what we become. But contrary to popular imagination, this is not a new idea
- something that Sartre or Maslow dreamt up one fine sunny day somewhere in
the middle of the twentieth century. Aristotle addressed this issue in the
Nichomachean Ethics in the fourth century BC. And almost two thousand years
later, in an "Oration On the Dignity of Man", delivered in 1487, Pico Della
Mirandola said that the distinctive attribute of our species -- which separates us
from animals, on the one hand, and angels, on the other -- is that we are
endowed with both animal and angelic propensities, but are free to choose
whether we embrace and affirm our bestial or angelic natures (Mirandola, 1965).
By contrast with humans, presumably, animals and angels lack this dual nature
and the corresponding freedom to choose. They simply are what they are.
According to existentialists and humanists then, heredity and environment,
instinct and adaptation play important roles in shaping character and conduct,
but they do not necessarily determine what we are or who we become.
Finally, another similarity between existential analysis and humanistic
psychology is that to varying degrees, and in different ways, they both draw on
an older, European tradition of literary and philosophical humanism. The
humanist outlook is sometimes associated with the Stoic philosopher Terence,
whose motto was “Homo sum; nihil humani me alienum puto”, or “ I am a
man; nothing human is alien to me”. The broad implication of this remark is
that Terence refused to identify with one particular ethnic group. On the
contrary, he regarded himself as what the Stoics called a cosmopolites – a citizen of
the universe, and not the representative of a particular race, nation or religious
orientation. In short, Terence embraced a pan-human identity that transcends
the vagaries of ethnicity and religious belief.
During the Renaissance, the term “humanism” was associated with the
revival of pagan learning by the likes of Marsilio Ficino and Pico della
Mirandolla, who stressed 1) the need for well-rounded people to study “the
humanities”, and 2) the essential compatibility between neo-Stoic and neoPlatonic philosophy and the Christian faith. Later, the term “humanism” was
used to describe the sensibilities of non-dogmatic Christians like Petrarch and
Erasmus, who felt that Christianity is as germaine to the problems of living in
this world as it is to seeking salvation in the next.
Later still, the term “humanism” was attached to the work of historians
like Giambatista Vico and Jacob Burkhardt, who resisted the positivist program
for the human sciences, and looked back at the Renaissance as a period
particularly worthy of veneration. But by the mid 19th century, it was also
adopted by left-wing Hegelians like Ludwig Feuerbach and Karl Marx.
314

Following in the Enlightenment tradition, they used the term “humanism” to
describe an explicitly atheistic outlook that explains belief in the supernatural and
longings for transcendence as the result of the (unconscious) projection of the
“human essence” into an otherworldly realm, which is conjured up by the
faithful as a consolation for (and the legitimation of) an unjust social order that
constrains or deforms our latent sociability and capacity to reason. Unlike
Burkhardt and others, whose humanism was centered on the study or emulation
of the past, Feuerbach and Marx made the realization of humanism a task for
the future. Marx summed this up nicely when he said that we are still caught up
in the era of human prehistory . By this reckoning, real human history has yet to
begin, and will not commence until exploitation, oppression and the ideologies
that serve to justify or disguise them all cease to exist.
In the 20th century , the term humanism usually denoted a resolute refusal
to ground ethics in any supernatural or transcendental framework, coupled with
an optimistic faith in the ability of science to illumine and improve our collective
lot. Thus, for example, at mid century, Julian Huxley spoke in useful and
illuminating ways of “evolutionary humanism”. Unfortunately, during the 20th
century (and to this day) some of the more facile, unreflective forms this brand
of humanism takes on verge on sheer scientism – an uncritical reliance on
science to provide solutions to existential problems. Humanism of this skeptical
and/or ethical persuasion is simply an extension of old-fashioned
Enlightenment rationalism, and despite obvious points of similarity, is quite
wary of Marxism, which it regards as a kind of a secular religion.
In any case, the preceding reflections make it crystal clear that no one owns
the term “humanism”, and with it, the right to prescribe how it ought to be
used, or what it ought to mean. Judging from history, humanism may be
religious or irreligious, contemplative or activist, forward or backward looking.
But that does not mean that the term itself is so fraught with ambiguity that it is
meaningless, even in our ostensibly posthuman era. There is a lucid, intelligible
core to humanism that informs all of its diverse manifestations. For whatever
form it takes, humanism emphasizes the fundamental unity of the human
species, and our duty to defend and promote human dignity and welfare in our
time, rather than in kingdom come. And despite the astonishing amount of antihumanist rhetoric we’ve endured from the avant garde lately, I fail to see why we
should abandon or even question these values. On the contrary, now more than
ever, we should embrace and defend them.
Having said that , however, it is also imperative that, as scholars and as
psychologists, we learn to differentiate clearly between “humanism” as a
philosophical outlook and “humanistic psychology”. The former began as a
movement within Christianity that fostered the revival of pagan learning, and the
ongoing cultivation of a tradition of multilingual, bookish reflection on history
315

and the human condition that stretches backwards to Herodotus and the Bible ,
and forwards to politically engaged (post-Christian) intellectuals like George
Orwell and Albert Camus, and to exemplary scholars like Lewis Mumford or
Northrop Frye, who were equally well versed in the wisdom of Christian and
pre-Christian (and/or non-Christian) civilizations. By contrast, humanistic
psychology began as a specifically American response to a specifically American
situation – the dominance of behaviorism and psychoanalysis over the mental
health field in the Cold War era. And while it has changed and developed
considerably since its inception, no doubt, the relationship of humanistic
psychology to the older, European humanism has been problematic, and
possibly quite tenuous at times. Indeed, to existentialist critics , it often seemed
that humanistic psychology focused so much on experiential processes in the
here and now that it treated philosophy, not as a parent discipline, or as a basis
for rigorous reflection, as existentialists do habitually, but as a kind of
afterthought, or a resource-pool of intriguing ideas that can be invoked or
ignored at the theorist’s convenience.
While focusing on the inter-experiential flow between therapist and
patient can be extremely useful, and extremely powerful, therapeutically
speaking , an exclusive focus on this kind of therapeutic virtuosity can also
foster a kind of thoughtlessness and a strident anti-intellectualism that is
completely at odds with the bookish and cultivated sensibilities that people used
to call “humanist”. And it was from this humanist – rather than “humanistic”perspective that the inimitable Sigmund Koch lashed out against the “human
potential” and “sensitivity training” movements spawned by humanistic
psychology in the 1960’s. In his estimation, this movement
“ . . . is adept at the image-making maneuver of evading human reality in
the very process of seeking to discover and enhance it. It seeks to court
spontaneity and authenticity by artifice; to combat instrumentalism
instrumentally; to provide access to experience by reducing it to a packaged
commodity; to liberate individuality by group shaping. Within the lexicon of its
concepts and methods, openness becomes transparency; love, caring and
sharing become a barter of “reinforcements or perhaps mutual ego-titillation;
aesthetic receptivity or immediacy becomes “sensory awareness”. It can provide
only a grotesque simulacrum of every noble quality it courts. (Koch, 1971,
pp.315-316).
While some cringe at the severity of this sweeping dismissal, most of my
experiences with groups of this kind in the seventies were quite consistent with
this description. There was a pervasive anti-intellectualism about them , and a
deep seated suspicion of any attempt to preserve one’s dignity through reserve
316

or mere silence, responses to group pressure which are understood and
respected instinctively by Europeans. Fortunately, humanistic psychology has
evolved considerably since then, acquiring much more philosophical
sophistication. And in all fairness, humanistic psychologists have been quite
receptive to the ideas and publications of existential and phenomenological
thinkers and therapists in North America, providing them with attentive,
sympathetic audiences while the rest of the profession generally tuned them out.
So, how can we best describe the differences between humanistic
psychologists and existential psychotherapists? Despite some noteworthy
exceptions here and there, existentialists are humanists in the older, European
sense of the word more often than humanistic psychologists are, as a rule,
because they tend to ground their approach in a firm and fluent grasp of
specific texts, and of specific themes and thinkers that precede them. They
don’t minimize or ignore the importance of openness to experience or authentic
self-disclosure, but they don’t make a fetish of them either. Moreover,
existentialists tend to possess a clearer recognition of human limits and a tragic
sense of life that is typically European, and which qualifies their emphasis on
self-authorship and/or self-actualization with reminders of the inevitability of
suffering and death , and the elements of mystery and paradox that suffuse
every human life.
That being so, it appears that John Rowan is right to claim that a Venn
diagram depicting the relationship between existential and humanistic
psychotherapy would show a considerable degree of overlap between the two
orientations. But in fairness to Spinelli et al., that statement is chiefly true with
respect to the United States. Why? Because beginning with Rollo May, a pupil
of Tillich , an admirer of Buber’s, and a founding member of the Association
for Humanistic Psychology, there have been many theorists and therapists here
who wear both these “hats” quite comfortably – James Bugenthal, Eugene
Gendlin, Thomas Greening, Alvin Mahrer, Ilene Serlin and Kirk Schneider,
among others. And conversely, as Rowan rightly insists, there are many
existential psychotherapists here and abroad who, whether they care to
acknowledge it or not, are indebted to humanistic psychology for specific
“techniques” or clinical interventions of one sort or another.
Having said that, however, Rowan is thoroughly mistaken when he claims
that “humanistic psychotherapy, in all its variants, is the real home of
existentialism as a praxis” (p. 446). And when he goes on to claim that
“Existential analysis, on the other hand, is a heresy, a cult or a sideshow by
comparison” with humanistic psychology, he exceeds the bounds of courtesy as
well as common sense. The historical record flatly contradicts these assertions
which, as it happens, illustrate my own thesis about the profoundly a-historical
character of humanistic psychology’s approach to the theory and practice of
317

psychotherapy. Rowan reveals his impoverished historical perspective clearly
when he speculates that the reason existential and humanistic psychotherapy
“became separate” was probably that “existential writers saw the excesses of
humanistic psychology during the 1960’s and early 1970’s and did not want to
be tarred with the same brush” (p. 448). In truth, like Sigmund Koch, many
existentialists did take their distance from humanistic psychology in the sixties
and seventies, and Rowan’s “explanation” for the alleged factionalism of Spinelli
et al. might be valid if the history of psychotherapy began in the sixties.
(Perhaps it did, for Rowan personally!) However, the fact remains that that
existential psychotherapy, in one form or another, precedes humanistic
psychology by at least two decades in Europe. So it was never a question of
these two orientations “becoming separate” at some unspecified historical
juncture. They were separate to begin with, and for a variety of historical
reasons, were only blended here in the United States.
That being so, should we cease speaking (or writing) of an “existentialhumanistic” orientation in deference to Spinelli and his colleagues? Obviously
not, if we are speaking about local and/or national trends or perspectives. But if
we are addressing global trends in the world of psychotherapy, we should always
qualify this usage by emphasizing its reference to American psychology. If this
seems unnecessarily cumbersome, or prompts the accusation that in so doing,
we are pandering to unrealistic expectations or unjustified demands , remember
that our failure to do so will feed fears among psychologists internationally
regarding our ostensibly colonialist tendency to “Americanize” psychology, and
to negate the Otherness and specificity of divergent cultural perspectives. Unless
these fears are grounded in fact, this is something that any humanist with some
sense of history and a modicum of tact will strenuously try to avoid.
References
Barnes, H. (1959) Humanistic Existentialism: The Literature of
Possibility, Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Bugenthal, J. (1978), Psychotherapy and Process: The Fundamentals
of An Existential-Humanist Approach , New York: McGraw Hill.
Burston, D. (1991), The Legacy of Erich Fromm, Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Burston, D. (1996), The Wing of Madness: The Life and Work of
R.D.Laing, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Fromm, E. (1955), The Sane Society, Greenwich: Fawcett Premier
Books.
Koch, S. (1971), “Reflections on Psychology”, Social Research, 38,
669-709.
May,R., Angel, E. & Ellenberger, H. (1958) Existence: A New
318

Dimension in Psychiatry and Psychology, New York: Simon &
Schuster.
Mirandolla, P. 1965, “On The Dignity of Man”, Library of the Liberal
Arts, New York: Bobbs-Merrill.
Rowan, J. (2001) “Existential Analysis and Humanistic
Psychotherapy”, in Schneider, K., Bugenthal, J. & Pierson, J.F.,
Eds, The Handbook of Humanistic Psychology: Leading Edges in
Theory, Research & Practice, Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Spinelli, E., 1989, The Interpreted World: An Introduction to
Phenomenological Psychology, London: Sage.
Spinelli, E., 2001, “A Reply to John Rowan”, ”, in Schneider, K.,
Bugenthal, J. & Pierson, J.F., eds, The Handbook of Humanistic
Psychology: Leading Edges in Theory, Research & Practice,
Thousand Oaks: Sage.

319

