Journal of Humanistic Psychology OnlineFirst, published on March 27, 2009 as
doi:10.1177/0022167809334001

James Bugental
and Irvin Yalom
Two Masters of Existential
Therapy Cultivate Presence
in the Therapeutic Encounter

Journal of Humanistic
Psychology
Volume XX Number X
Month XXXX xx-xx
© 2009 Sage Publications
10.1177/0022167809334001
http://jhp.sagepub.com
hosted at
http://online.sagepub.com

Orah T. Krug
Existential-Humanistic Institute

James Bugental and Irvin Yalom, noted existential psychotherapists and educators, both emphasize a psychotherapeutic method that cultivates presence. This
important yet difficult to define therapeutic method deserves greater clarification due to its role in effecting therapeutic change. The present study compared
Bugental and Yalom on selected presuppositions that relate to the cultivation
of presence in order to explore their influence on each man’s practice of existential psychotherapy. A psychobiographical framework illuminated how their
personal experiences influenced the formation of these presuppositions. The
present study revealed that the different presuppositions, which Bugental and
Yalom hold about existential psychotherapy, influence each therapist’s theoretical understanding of the cultivation of presence, which in turn shape how
each practices existential psychotherapy. Although both therapists concentrate
more on process than on content, Bugental usually attends to the intrapersonal
processes of the client whereas Yalom often attends to the interpersonal processes. The findings of the present study help explain current research related
to the significance of contextual factors in the therapeutic endeavor. The findings also highlight the importance of clarifying therapeutic presuppositions
and assumptions. Finally, the findings illuminate the benefit of integrating
intrapersonal and interpersonal approaches.
Keywords:

I

James Bugental; Irvin Yalom; intrapersonal presence; interpersonal presence; existential psychotherapy; contextual factors

have been practicing psychotherapy from an existential–humanistic perspective for almost 30 years. For nearly 20 of those years, I have learned

Author’s Note: Please address correspondence to Orah T. Krug, 5655 College Avenue, Suite
315 E, Oakland, CA, 94618; e-mail: orahkrug@sbcglobal.net.
1

2   Journal of Humanistic Psychology

my craft from two masters in the field of existential–humanistic psychotherapy: James Bugental, PhD and Irvin Yalom, MD. Both have significantly influenced my work and my life.

The Masters
James F. T. Bugental, PhD, was one of the founders of humanistic psychology along with Rollo May, Gordon Allport, Abraham Maslow, and
Carl Rogers. His writings, in particular Search for Authenticity (1965,
1981), provided intellectual inspiration and legitimization to this third
wave of psychology in the United States (DeCarvalho, 1991). A psychotherapist for nearly a half century, Bugental has authored numerous books
and articles exploring the practice and teaching of existential–humanistic
psychotherapy. My association with the late James Bugental began in
1987, when he closed his private practice and turned his attention to teaching and training.
The field of psychology recognizes Irvin Yalom, MD, as a master therapist whose contributions include two classic texts, The Theory and Practice
of Group Therapy (1975) and Existential Psychotherapy (1980). Professor
Emeritus in psychiatry at Stanford Medical School, Dr. Yalom practices in
Palo Alto, where he lives, and in San Francisco. My association with Irvin
Yalom began in 1994 as a member of his consultation group.
Each of my mentors has contributed to the field of existential psychotherapy in numerous ways (Cooper, 2003; Schneider & May, 1995; van
Deurzen-Smith, 1997). One notable contribution is their articulation of a
psychotherapeutic method, the purpose of which is to illuminate here-andnow processes emerging in the therapeutic encounter. The current study
compares the ways in which Bugental and Yalom theoretically understand
this method. The phrase here-and-now refers to what is emerging, in the
here of the therapy room and the now of the immediate moment. Yalom
specifically uses this phrase in his texts on psychotherapy (1975, 1980,
1998, 2002), Bugental does not, but refers to the work in a similar way;
that is, he talks about illuminating what is “in this room in this now”
(Bugental, 1999).
I have chosen to call this method the cultivation of presence. The name
not only implies the here-and-now, but also describes a therapeutic attitude,
that of cultivating as well as a therapeutic intention that of expanded presence. Thus, the name meets two important requirements: It comprehensively describes the method and by including presence in the name, it
anchors the method in existential therapeutic theory.

Krug / Two Masters of Existential Therapy   3

Presence is a fundamental principle of existential therapy and is considered by many existential theorists to be central to effecting change
(Bugental, 1987; Friedman, 1985; May, 1958; Schneider & May, 1995;
Yalom, 2002). These theorists believe that presence plays a vital role in the
development of a healing environment and a safe and intimate therapeutic
relationship. Meta-analytic research confirms that such contextual factors
as opposed to specific treatment techniques, are primarily responsible for
helping people change (Wampold, 2001). Moreover, in a recent book
review, Wampold (2008) concurred with noted existential theorist, Kirk
Schneider, suggesting that the principles of existential therapy may be
“needed by all therapists, as it adds a perspective that might . . . form the
basis of all effective treatments."
Even though presence is fundamental to existential therapy and related
to these contextual factors, it remains vaguely understood and loosely
defined (Geller & Greenberg, 2002). The literature typically describes it in
regards to the capacity of the therapist to be deeply connected to self and/
or to self and other (Cooper, 2005; Friedman, 1985; Geller & Greenberg,
2002; Schneider, 2003). It is suggested here that Bugental and Yalom
articulate an expanded conception of being present that includes, but goes
beyond, experiences or moments of deep connection with self and other.
Their approach assumes not only that each person is related to self, to
other, and to the physical world, but also that each person’s past is present
in the here-and-now. Using these assumptions as a basis for their work,
Bugental and Yalom typically focus more on the unfolding processes to
cultivate presence than on the objective content, with the intention of illuminating the client’s underlying subjective constructs of self and world.
The term self and world constructs refers to how the client implicitly understands and manifests through behaviors and attitudes his or her own nature
and relationship to the world. Existential therapists understand people as a
beings-in-the-world who construct their physical, personal, and relational
worlds from their individual experiences and circumstances in the world.
The in-the-moment illumination provided by the therapist is an opportunity
for the client not only to experience a deep connection with self and other
but also to experience how specific behaviors and/or attitudes block him or
her from these deeper connections.
This intentionality to illuminate unconscious behavioral and attitudinal
patterns by a focus on process distinguishes their work and expands the
definition of therapeutic presence. Each has written extensively on the
merits of working in this way (Bugental, 1976, 1978, 1981, 1987, 1999;
Yalom, 1975, 1980, 1989, 1999, 2002). The cultivation of presence requires

4   Journal of Humanistic Psychology

the therapist to identify “what is implicitly present but unregarded”
(Bugental, 1999, p. 23). For Bugental and Yalom, the cultivation of presence is not didactic or theoretically abstract; it is instead experiential and
concrete. Because they both believe that a person’s way of being in therapy
is a reflection of how that person is in his or her life (Bugental, 1999;
Yalom, 2002), they attend to and illuminate what is implicitly and explicitly
happening in the present moment. Bugental has noted the challenging
nature of this method. “It does not just accept and encourage; it helps the
client face the implicit and often unrecognized contradictions within his or
her own outlook” (Schulenberg, 2003, p. 275).
For instance, if a client embodies childlike attitudes and behaviors and
relates to the therapist as a parent, the existential therapist would not likely
explain this to the client. Instead, the therapist would carefully and respectfully illuminate aspects of the client’s subjective and intersubjective experiences that are manifesting in the present moment such as, “your voice is so
soft and little right now” (subjective) or “you seem to be asking for my
advice (intersubjective).”
Yet what they are present to in the here-and-now is often quite different.
Bugental’s focus on process is typically subjective or intrapersonal. This
means he is keenly attending to what is “subjectively alive in the now”
(Bugental, 1999, p. 37). “You hesitated just then” or “it’s sometimes hard for
you to show your feelings” (p. 143). When working with Bugental in a roleplay, I experienced his presence as only inches away psychically. His lack of
reference to our relationship did nothing to diminish my sense of his empathic
and sensitive presence; he was like a mirror, reflecting me back to myself.
Yalom’s focus on process is typically interpersonal or intersubjective,
which means that he is closely attending to what is happening relationally.
In fact, Yalom defines process exclusively in interpersonal terms. “What do
the words (and the nonverbal behavior as well) tell us about the nature of
the relationship between the parties engaged in the interaction?” (Yalom,
2002, p. xviii). Thus, he might say, “As much as I enjoy hearing your stories, they seem to create distance between us, and I want to be closer to
you.” In consultation with Yalom, I have frequently experienced his skill
and care in addressing our relationship issues.
It is interesting to note that Bugental’s focus on the subjective realm and
Yalom’s focus on the intersubjective realm articulates the divergent thinking
of existentialists regarding what helps a person expand their authenticity and
realize their potential. It has been a challenge to integrate their different perspectives into my clinical practice. In doing so, I have come to appreciate how
an approach, integrating both perspectives, can create an even more effective

Krug / Two Masters of Existential Therapy   5

context for change by providing clients with multifaceted experiences of their
subjective and relational ways of being. Moreover, as a result of my work with
them, an intriguing question developed which drove this research.

Purpose and Statement of the Problem
The purpose of this study is to explore the following question: Why are
Bugental and Yalom frequently present to different processes even though
they are similarly devoted to cultivating presence in the here-and-now? The
thesis advanced here is that the basis for Bugental’s focus on intrapersonal
processes (though not exclusively) and Yalom’s focus on interpersonal
processes (though not exclusively) is their respective presuppositions. The
study draws from their published work on this topic and on the researcher’s
consultative work with them. The intention is not only to compare their
presuppositions but also to begin to understand how their presuppositions
influence their attention to different aspects of the therapeutic process and
to explain the origins of their approaches.
To achieve this, their presuppositions are compared on five dimensions
of existential therapy. The five dimensions are (a) the essence of human
beings and their existential predicament, (b) the central aim of existential
therapy, (c) the meaning and value of working in the here-and-now, (d) the
role and focus of attention for the therapist, and (e) the value of the therapeutic relationship.
The choice of these five dimensions was influenced by Corsini and
Weddings’s Current Psychotherapies (1995) in which they chose to compare current psychotherapies along similar dimensions, that is, therapeutic
theory and therapeutic process. By loosely applying their selected dimensions to a comparison of Bugental’s and Yalom’s perspectives on existential
therapy, the five aforementioned dimensions emerged. The inclusion of the
last four dimensions was also influenced by the fact that both Bugental and
Yalom (Bugental, 1978, 1987, 1999; Yalom, 2002) examined similar dimensions when considering aspects of the therapeutic encounter.
The first dimension—the essential nature of human beings and their
existential predicament—deserves some elaboration because of its significance in the present study and some readers may not be familiar with it. It
is a concept developed by Paul Tillich (1962), the noted theologian and
philosopher, who argued that existential psychotherapy has erred by concentrating predominately on the existential predicament and not sufficiently
on essentialist thought. In the essay, he proposes a philosophical foundation
for psychotherapy in which essentialist and existentialist thought coexist in

6   Journal of Humanistic Psychology

a complementary dialectic relationship. Tillich suggests that the nature of
human beings aptly reflects the essential/existential dialectic saying, “One
can describe man’s essential nature and one can describe man’s existential
predicament” (p. 39).
According to Tillich, an aspect of human beings essential nature is their
power to create themselves. This power is possible because all human
beings have the freedom to choose and he suggests that there is an essential
structure to this power. He calls this aspect of human nature, “an essentialist doctrine of freedom” (Tillich, 1962, p. 40). The existential predicament
of human beings is related to their essential nature in the particular way
that each individual chooses to relate to the givens of existence. For example, in psychotherapy we see individuals who are acutely anxious and
deeply estranged from self and others, reflecting their particular way of
choosing (unconscious though it may be) to constrict and/or block their
awareness of the givens of existence, such as death or isolation.
Tillich (1962) argues that if the practice of psychotherapy recognized
this contrasting union of essentialism and existentialism, it could more
adequately describe the relationship between the essential nature of human
beings and their existential predicament. Tillich insightfully illustrated this
view, saying, “in order to understand estrangement . . . [we] must understand that from which we are estranged, namely our own essential nature”
(p. 42). Tillich’s perspective has great merit—a focus on essentialist thought
does indeed need to be a part of psychotherapeutic theory as much as
existential thought. Consequently, this dimension is included to facilitate
an examination of the extent to which the presuppositions by Bugental and
Yalom recognize this union of essentialism and existentialism in existential psychotherapy.

Rationale and Significance
Several motives fuel this research. Although presence as a construct is
fundamental to existential therapy and is considered by many a key element
in effecting therapeutic change, the research indicates (as already noted)
that the concept is difficult to define and understand. Consequently, an
exploration of how these two masters cultivate presence may enhance our
understanding of this important construct and the ways in which it effects
change. My personal experience as a student of both Bugental and Yalom
provides an unusual vantage point for this exploration. Their perspectives
on cultivating presence—as found in their published texts—can be filtered
through a personal as well as scholarly lens.

Krug / Two Masters of Existential Therapy   7

In addition, it is hoped that an important factor in the education and
training of existential psychotherapists will be addressed, that is, the need
for therapists-in-training to be aware of their own presuppositions with
respect to, for example, the dimensions explored in this essay. This awareness is important to discern which issues and which approach may be most
relevant to a particular patient. Without this clarity, the therapist is like a
navigator without a compass. Bugental and Yalom are well able to navigate
the murky therapeutic waters because each has a finely honed internal compass that points him towards what cultivates change and a sense of how to
facilitate that change. To explore these questions, the remainder of the article will compare the presuppositions of Bugental and Yalom on the aforementioned five dimensions.

Bugental’s Presuppositions Related
to Existential Psychotherapy
The Essence of Human Beings
and Their Existential Predicament
If Paul Tillich (1962) is correct in suggesting that a focus on essence is
as important as a focus on existence, then James Bugental’s work has made
a significant contribution in that direction. Bugental’s focus on intrapersonal process is grounded in his rather radical presupposition that we are
essentially a process and not a substance.
The essence of my being is that I am subjective awareness continually in
process . . . In short, I am no thing, nothing. I am solely the process of my
being—as an example, I am the process of writing these words, but I am not
the content of the words or the ideas they express. I am the being aware of
writing, the choosing of ways of expressing thoughts, the hoping for communication, the enjoying of the emergence in thoughts and images of what
I have experienced. (Bugental, 1976, p. 14)

Bugental’s perspective of “self-as-process” has obvious and significant
implications regarding the fundamental structures of human existence.
Although he never elaborated on the structure of this essential process, a
number of philosophers, including Alfred N. Whitehead, have. I do not know
if Bugental was aware of Whitehead’s process philosophy, but Whitehead’s
focus on the structure of experience provides a solid philosophical foundation
for Bugental’s perspective on self-as-process and not as substance (Whitehead,

8   Journal of Humanistic Psychology

1978). It is beyond the scope of this study to elaborate on Whitehead’s metaphysics and its potential contribution to existential psychotherapy but such a
study by this author and Victor Goulet is currently underway.
In 1963, as president of the newly formed Association of Humanistic
Psychology, Bugental (1963) suggested five basic postulates regarding
human essence: (a) man, as man, supersedes the sum of his parts; (b) man
has his being in a human context; (c) man is aware; (d) man has choice; and
(e) man is intentional. His focus on people as aware, free, and capable of
choice was a reaction to the reductionistic and positivistic theories of
behaviorism and psychoanalysis.
As result of his more humanistic perspective, Bugental did not often
focus on the existential predicament (i.e., awareness of the facts of existence) in his writings. Instead, his focus on the self-as-process leads him to
understand the central problem for those in therapy to be self-alienation
because of a psychological split.
Self-alienation, Bugental believes, leads a person to live a life similar to that
of a prisoner who is driven by a suspicious and relentless keeper. The person
is split into a tyrannical boss and an untrustworthy worker who continually
strives to do more, to do it better, to prove self against an impossible standard.
(Bugental, 1978, p. 127)

Bugental does acknowledge the existential predicament, in that, as this
person experiences himself or herself as a process and not a fixed substance, he or she will be “on the verge of a terrible emptiness and a miraculous freedom” (Bugental, 1978, p. 133). But his focus is not primarily
on accepting the limitations and tragic aspects of existence, but rather, on
accepting the fact that our identities are solely as processes and that we
arbitrarily construct our world. Once persons open to that awareness they
recognize that they can choose to remake their lives (pp. 134-135).
Bugental has suggested that his belief in self-as-process came as a
result of his observations that one could never completely grasp a person, that there was always something more occurring within that person
in the next moment. He assumed that when he took his first college psychology course he would be better able to understand the something
more. He was disappointed; in fact, it seemed the psychology course,
instead of explaining the something more, made something less of people (Bugental, 1987). “The world of something more is the subjective
world,” about which, according to Bugental, we know so little, and yet
it is our homeland (p. 19).

Krug / Two Masters of Existential Therapy   9

The Central Aim of Existential Therapy
Bugental’s presupposition about self-as-process significantly influences
his perspective on the central aim of existential therapy. He aims for internal wholeness (Bugental, 1978, p. 124), to repair the split and alienated self
by recovering the “lost sense of being” (Bugental, 1976, p. 10). He believes
that when the sense of being is recovered, when there is internal wholeness,
people are freed from the bonds of “fear, guilt, shame and conflict”
(Bugental, 1978, p. 106). He is absolutely certain that the way to recover
one’s lost sense of being is to concentrate almost exclusively on inner
awareness, to discover one’s “I-ness” (Bugental, 1976, p. 5). “Presence is
the sine qua non of most depth or life-changing psychotherapy” (Bugental,
1983, p. 1). Over and over again in his writings we find this conviction. The
following are but a few examples. “Centrally important . . . is heightening
the client’s own immediate and subjective awareness” (Bugental, 1999,
p. 23). “Increased awareness of ourselves in the living moment means
increased effectiveness of self-direction and increased satisfaction in
living” (Bugental, 1999, p. 24). A person who does this work is able to live
in their “truer nature” (Bugental, 1978, p. 114).
It is very interesting to note that Bugental’s perspective on what needs
to heal (self-alienation) and the way of healing (focusing on inner awareness) has its roots in his relationship with himself and others. In The Search
for Existential Identity (1976), he shares his own experiences of growing
up in a home where his mother was cold, aloof, and withholding of love.
To win back her acceptance, he would promise to be good and be right.
Father was loving but undependable because he drank. Bugental grew up
feeling that he had to hide his secret self, which he believed was shameful
because it was sexual, emotional, and unpractical, in other words, not right.
“It want[ed] to play when I forced it to work” (p. 280).
Bugental’s (1976) sense of self was split between a tyrannical boss and
an untrustworthy worker, resulting in significant self-alienation. “I was
never taught to listen within myself. Instead, I was taught to listen to the
outside—to parents, teachers, Boy Scout leaders” (p. 283). One can easily
understand why, given Bugental’s personal experiences, he values inner
awareness, over and above awareness of others. As we shall see, this belief
in the primacy of the subjective, which apparently has roots in his childhood, became the guiding light for his therapy. Humans have their being in
a human context, but for Bugental, this fact may pose a serious problem:
Interpersonal experiences can result in alienation from self.

10   Journal of Humanistic Psychology

The Meaning and Value of Working in the Here-and-Now
Bugental’s belief in the healing power of inner awareness requires a
therapeutic approach that heightens the client’s subjective awareness in the
immediate moment (Bugental, 1999, p. 23). “The process of being aware is
itself the creative, growth-evoking process” (Bugental, 1976, p. 289).
Working in the here-and-now meets that requirement because it assumes that
“what is actual is what is in this room, in this now” (Bugental, 1999, p. 20).
For Bugental, cultivating presence means a focus on the clients subjective
processes, listening less to what is said, and more to how and when the saying
occurs; his aim is to have the person in therapy recognize their actual but
unregarded ways of being that are avoidant or distortive and begin to take
responsibility for their life choices.
To do this, Bugental focuses almost exclusively on his client’s intrapersonal processes and the inner stream of awareness.
The great bulk of my attention during the hour is directed to the processes of
the client’s activity rather than to the content. I am concerned to assess the
degree to which my partner is genuinely present—accessible to the inner
stream of awareness and expressive of all that is found there. (Bugental,
1978, p. 106)

It is evident from these quotes that genuine presence for Bugental means
accessibility to subjective awareness and an ability to express what is found
there. He frequently stresses the importance of the therapist’s own presence
as critical for a successful outcome (Bugental, 1978, p. 40). But what he
does not acknowledge is the influence of the therapist’s presence on the client’s inward presence; is not the client’s stream of awareness to some extent
influenced by the therapist? Similarly, he does not seem to value a focus on
the interpersonal; yet does not a focus on the relational or interpersonal
often deepen that which is intrapersonal?
The skill of subjective searching (i.e., the ability to access and express
inner experiences) is for Bugental the primary means for dissolving blocks
constricting inner awareness.
As the client is encouraged to search inwardly . . . he will demonstrate how
he sees his own nature . . . [T]he difficulties the client experiences in trying
to use the hour optimally are probably expressions of ways the client structures his life generally. (Bugental, 1999, p. 86)

Krug / Two Masters of Existential Therapy   11

Patterns and layers of resistance are revealed in the searching process
(Bugental, 1978, p. 51). As the blocks are revealed and dissolved, the major
work, according to Bugental, has been done, because now the client experiences herself as a subject and not an object. A client-as-subject can “claim
her own power, which has been latent all along” (Bugental, 1999, p. 24).
Moreover, the skill of searching provides the client with “lasting access to
inner awareness and thus the potential to enrich life long after the therapy
is terminated” (Bugental, 1978, p. 122). The fact that Bugental believes
the key to significant life change is found in recovering one’s centering of
life in subjective awareness helps explain why Bugental has a primarily
intrapersonal focus with his clients.
Bugental says (Schulenberg, 2003), that his approach was influenced by
Carl Rogers and Roger’s student, Victor Raimy, who was Bugental’s doctoral thesis advisor. In addition, Bugental was influenced by the work of
George Kelly and more personally by George Frumkes, his analyst. Bugental
said,
My experience in analysis definitely contributed particularly to my emphasis
on present tense . . . When I worked with George, I decided to be on the
couch and he encouraged me to pay attention to the stream of awareness that
came to me as I lay there. (Schulenberg, 2003, p. 280)

The Role of and Focus of Attention
for the Existential Therapist
Bugental describes his role as a coach: “We are not consultants on how
to live . . . we can be coaches for clients doing their own life work, using
their own innate capacity” (Bugental, 1999, p. 89). In conversations,
Bugental likened his role to that of a track and field coach who, running
along side the hurdler, helps him maintain his form. “My function is that of
being my client’s ally, of supporting the client’s effort to be authentically
present and effectively self-exploring” (Bugental, 1978, p. 106). As the client engages in the search process, he becomes aware of self-defeating patterns of behavior. These patterns are part of his self and world construct
system (“that is—how the client implicitly defines himself and the nature
of the world in which he lives” [1978, p. 87]). They serve to protect him
but also limit his ability to experience himself as subject and not object.
Bugental (1999) believes “the central focus of the therapist’s stance is
the client’s self-governance, the ways in which the client is self-defeating,

12   Journal of Humanistic Psychology

and how the client uses his own powers for his own best interests” (p. 89).
The therapist’s “core of attention is to the actual, for the therapist seeks to
identify in the living moment the ways in which the client ill serves his own
fulfillment” (p. 89). Here are some examples of how Bugental attends to
what is actual but implicit in the client. “Your feelings are at war, the
impatience attacking the sadness . . . You sound very distant as you say
that” (pp. 20-21). These examples illustrate Bugental’s subjective versus
relational focus. “For the kind of work I am concerned with, the primary
locus must be within the client’s own experiencing for the bulk of our time”
(Bugental, 1978, p. 107).
Bugental acknowledges that there is a time during which the relationship is the appropriate concern, but he stresses this is only after “the client
has gained a strong hold on the skill of inward searching” (Bugental, 1978,
p. 107). Furthermore, he seems to regard a focus on the relationship or on
himself as a necessary but not very valuable diversion from the real work
of inward searching. “[W]e must deal with these intrusions [italics added]
before anything else” if a client has difficulty staying with the inward
searching process (p. 107). That said, the reader may get the impression that
Bugental is somewhat cold and distant as he works. Nothing could be further from the truth. Working in consultation with Bugental on my own
issues, I have always felt his care and genuine engagement in my struggles.
He believes this kind of engagement makes possible his ability to tune into
the “implicit, the deeply subjective, and the nascent” (1978, p. 114).
However, in these experiences with Bugental, it must be said that I was not
encouraged to attend to what was happening between us.

The Value of the Therapeutic Relationship
The statements by Bugental mentioned above indicate that he does not
see focusing attention on the therapeutic relationship as an especially effective means for accelerating the healing/growth process. In fact, he appears
to regard attention on the interpersonal as more of a diversion from the real
work rather than a valuable method for facilitating change and growth.
“Too active a therapist participation . . . can disrupt the client’s immersion
in self-exploration” (Bugental, 1978, p. 90). Here again, although this statement is true to a degree, Bugental does not acknowledge the implicit influence a therapist has on his client’s self-exploration, nor the benefits that can
be derived from relational exploration.
If the therapeutic relationship is not central to the healing/growth process
for Bugental, how then does he relate to it? He understands it as a partnership

Krug / Two Masters of Existential Therapy   13

in which the therapist is facilitating his partner’s self-exploration so that the
partner’s constricting blocks can be dissolved. “The ideal relationship for
client and therapist is the one which will most facilitate client inner exploration . . . The work of client and therapist is that of freeing the former’s
awareness of encumbering armor” (Bugental, 1978, p. 63). The qualities of
an ideal existential therapeutic relationship include: mutuality, honesty,
respect, dynamism, vitality, and trust (pp. 66-71).
Even though Bugental believes it is terribly important for the therapist
to be aware of the state of the relationship, he does not advocate explicitly
asking that question. “I seek and count on an understanding that is rarely
expressed in words” (Bugental, 1978, p. 105). He acknowledges that “care
is itself a healing influence” (p. 115) but does not give it the weight that he
gives to cultivating subjective awareness. He seems to interpret the feedback he receives from clients about his steady caring not as a contributor
toward healing per se, but rather as a way to model how to care for oneself
(p. 114). Interestingly, at least one client differs with him on that point.
“Let’s face it, Jim’s feelings about me were and still are, the most important
part of our work together, maybe the only part. He liked me” (quoted in
Bugental, 1978, p. 118).

Yalom’s Presuppositions Related
to Existential Psychotherapy
The Essence of Human Beings and Their
Existential Predicament
Yalom’s presupposition about essence acknowledges the five humanistic
postulates that Bugental articulated in 1963 (Yalom, 1980, p. 18), but he
does not conceptualize the self-as-process as does Bugental. Instead, he puts
forth a dynamism called “existential psychodynamics” (Yalom, 1980).
“Existential psychodynamics” stands in contrast to Freudian psychodynamics. “The existential position emphasizes a different kind of basic conflict: neither a conflict with suppressed instinctual strivings nor one with
internalized significant adults, but instead a conflict that flows from the
individual’s confrontation with the givens of existence” (Yalom, 1980, p. 8).
By givens Yalom refers to certain facts of human existence which he calls
concerns: death, isolation, freedom, and meaninglessness. “The individual’s
confrontation with these facts of life constitutes the content of the existential
dynamic conflict” (p. 8).

14   Journal of Humanistic Psychology

Yalom believes that awareness of these concerns leads to existential
anxiety and guilt. Yalom’s perspective on self-awareness is darker than
Bugental’s. He focuses more on “human limitations and the tragic dimensions of existence” (Yalom, 1980, p. 19). In that regard, he aligns more with
existentialist thinkers than humanistic thinkers in believing that every individual will, to some extent, mute his or her awareness of these ultimate
concerns to cope with the unwanted existential anxiety and guilt. This muting
of awareness results in “specific defenses . . . which arise to serve the specific
function of coping with each of the primary existential fears” (p. 10). Yalom
believes that people will often seek therapy if they experience a significant
level of despair in regard to their human condition.
It is interesting to note that Yalom’s darker focus on the inherent tragedies
of existence may have been influenced by the near loss of his father at an
early age. As a child, Yalom was very close to his father and more distant
from his mother. He describes how he enjoyed warm moments with his
father, playing chess with him on Sunday mornings; he said he rarely shared
a warm moment with his mother whose anger he disliked (Yalom, 1999). In
private conversation and in his interview with Ilene Serlin (1999), Yalom
describes how his focus on aspects of existence was definitely influenced by
the writings of Rollo May. As a young psychiatric resident, at analytically
oriented Johns Hopkins in 1958, he met Rollo May “in spirit through his
writing.” Yalom said that Existence (May, 1958) revealed “another whole
unexplored wing of the edifice of psychotherapy . . . I think it changed me
in a very significant way” (p. 142). After that, Yalom began his philosophical
education, taking undergraduate philosophy courses at Johns Hopkins.
His interest in developing an existential approach to therapy is evident
in the choices he has made throughout his professional life. He has led
research studies at Stanford with terminal cancer patients, the elderly, and
the bereft; this has provided him with opportunities to work with or teach
students how to work with people experiencing intense existential pain.
When his work with cancer patients began to trigger his own death anxieties, he sought therapy with Rollo May. His relationship with May, first as
a patient, later as a friend and colleague, lasted until May’s death. Yalom
has described how May’s determination to face his deteriorating condition
courageously, deeply inspired him.

The Central Aim of Existential Therapy
Yalom believes that people in therapy fall into despair “as a result of a
confrontation with the brute facts of the human condition” (Yalom, 1998,

Krug / Two Masters of Existential Therapy   15

p. 43). This despair results not from a split self (which is Bugental’s presupposition), but from the individuals inability to bear existential predicaments. Thus, for Yalom, the central aim of existential therapy is “to derepress, to reacquaint the individual with something he or she has known
all along” (Yalom, 1980, p. 16). This process has two parts. The first is to
“encourage the individual to look within . . . to attend [and to accept] his or
her existential situation” (p. 14). This confrontation “is painful but ultimately healing” (p. 14).
But acceptance of responsibility for one’s life is not enough for Yalom.
At this point, the person has only entered the “antechamber of change”
(Yalom, 1998, p. 73). For real change to occur the person has to act, to
behave differently in the world. Thus, the real work of therapy begins when
the therapist embarks on an effort “to transform a sense of personal dissatisfaction into a decision to change and then into the act of change” (p. 73).
For Yalom, the act of change involves will. “The intrapsychic agency
that initiates an act, that transforms intention and decision into action, is
will. Will is the primary responsible mover within the individual” (Yalom,
1998, p. 73). Like Rollo May and Otto Rank, Yalom believes the therapist’s
role is not to create will but to “remove encumbrances from the bound or
stifled will of the patient” (p. 74). When will is disencumbered, the person
accepts his or her own agency and no longer tries to change the environment instead of himself or herself (Yalom, 2002, p. 147).
Yalom’s belief that the central aim of existential therapy is to re-acquaint
the individual with something he or she has known all along is evident in
his text of case studies, Love’s Executioner (1989). In fact, the title alludes
to the way in which Yalom concentrates his efforts on helping clients dissolve the illusions they have constructed to avoid facing the realities of
existence: Thelma’s obsession with her former therapist so as to avoid the
reality of death and disintegration, Betty’s gay and entertaining way of
being to avoid her feelings of emptiness and isolation, and Penny’s neurotic
guilt over not being present when her daughter died to avoid facing her real
guilt over the neglect of her two sons. Over and over in these case studies
we appreciate Yalom’s refusal to ignore these self-destructive illusions and
instead to root them out so as to free his clients from their constricting
bonds.
Yalom has a third perspective on what needs to heal and grow that
comes from his training and interest in group therapy. “I have generally
stressed that my interests in group psychotherapy and existential psychotherapy are separate and discrete: Not only do the therapies have different
formats . . . but they operate from different frames of reference” (Yalom,

16   Journal of Humanistic Psychology

1998, p. 43). Yalom was trained at John Hopkins by Jerome Frank, a master
of group psychotherapy and was influenced by neo-Freudians such as
Horney and Sullivan. As a result, he assumes from a group psychotherapy
perspective that “patients fall into despair because of their inability to establish and maintain stabilizing and intimate relationships with others (p. 43).
Thus, from this perspective, another task of the therapist is to illuminate for
clients how their ways of relating are insufficient or destructive and help
expand their capacity for intimate relationships.
Although it is true that these therapies operate from different frames of
reference, I must take exception with my mentor if he assumes that existential philosophy and existential therapy do not include a focus on one’s
relationships with others. One only needs to look to the relational perspectives of several existential thinkers, including Buber (1937/1970) and
Marcel (1995). Yalom’s own mentor, Rollo May (1983), specifically references Heidegger’s existential perspective regarding “three simultaneous
aspects of world—which characterize the existence of each one of us as
being in the world” (pp. 126-127). There is the Umwelt, or the environment,
the Mitwelt, or the world of interrelationships with human beings, and the
Eigenwelt, or our own world, which not only presupposes self-awareness
and self-relatedness, but is the basis on which we relate to the real world.
“The human being lives in Umwelt, Mitwelt, and Eigenwelt simultaneously.
They are by no means three different worlds but three simultaneous modes
of being in the world” (p. 129). May points out that even though
Mitwelt and interpersonal theory should not be identified, Mitwelt and interpersonal theory have a great deal in common. The danger at this point, however, is that if Eigenwelt in turn is omitted, interpersonal relations tend to
become hollow and sterile. (p. 130)

May’s statements certainly support the notion that when a therapist is
focusing on the relationship in the here-and-now, he or she could be working from an existential or interpersonal orientation or both. Moreover,
May’s reference to Heidegger’s modes of being-in-the-world provides further confirmation that an interpersonal focus is as much a part of existential
therapeutic theory as is an intrapersonal focus. Not only are both intra- and
interpersonal foci appropriate existentially, but May also argues that both
are necessary so that neither mode of being is emphasized to the exclusion
of the other.
Yalom’s interest in and focus on interpersonal difficulties—specifically
on the isolation which many individuals in therapy experience—may be

Krug / Two Masters of Existential Therapy   17

rooted in his personal experiences. In his texts he describes his childhood
and teenage years as a period during which he experienced a good deal of
isolation (Yalom, 1989). He grew up in racially segregated Washington,
DC, as the only son in the only White Jewish family living in the midst of
a Black neighborhood. He recalled how the Black kids would pick on him
because he was White and the White kids would pick on him because he
was a Jew. At a talk at the Jewish Community Center of San Francisco
recently (2006), Yalom described how he sought refuge in the library and
how books became his friends. These early experiences may have influenced his perspective on what needs to heal, and it seems to have influenced how he has chosen to live his life. It is apparent to me that even
though Yalom takes pride in his significant professional achievements, he
seems to take as much pride and put as much effort into his personal relationships as a husband, father, friend, and mentor.

The Meaning and Value of Working in the Here-and-Now
If for Yalom, what needs to heal and/or grow is (a) acceptance of the
givens of existence and assumption of personal responsibility, (b) willful
choice, and (c) increased capacity for intimate relationships, then a method
of therapy that illuminates in the moment how the person is blocked in
these ways is needed. Yalom (1998) firmly believes in the value of cultivating presence by working in the here-and-now. [The] “here-and-now
approach . . . is the signature of my particular approach to therapy, both
individual and group therapy” (p. 43).
“The here-and-now is the major source of therapeutic power, the pay dirt
of therapy, the therapist’s (and hence the patient’s) best friend,” (Yalom,
2002, p. 46). In Love’s Executioner (1989) he continually points to the ways
in which a therapist gains leverage by working in the here-and-now. The
here-and-now, according to Yalom, refers to
The immediate events of the therapeutic hour, to what is happening here (in
this office, in this relationship, in the in-betweeness-the space between me
and you) and now, in this immediate hour. It is basically an ahistorical
approach and de-emphasizes (but does not negate the importance of) the
patient’s historical past or events of his or her life. (Yalom, 2002, p. 46)

Interestingly, Yalom’s definition of what it means to work in the hereand-now is similar to Bugental’s, in that its focus is on the now, that is, on
the immediate present moment rather than on the past. Yet he defines the

18   Journal of Humanistic Psychology

here differently than does Bugental. Like Bugental, Yalom’s here is in the
office but here is not a concentration on the client’s intrapersonal process;
instead it is a concentration on the interpersonal process occurring between
the therapist and client (Yalom, 2002, p. xvii.) Yalom defines process
­primarily in terms of the interaction. Consequently, working in the hereand-now for Yalom, unlike for Bugental, means illuminating expressions of
the individual’s self and world construct system as it manifests in the
­relationship.
Yalom’s rationale for working in the here-and-now rests on several
assumptions which come from interpersonal, not existential, theory, but
which he combines with existential theory in his individual therapy. “I value
the entire range of therapeutic factors, but I place particular importance on
interpersonal learning (and its accompanying here-and-now focus)”
(Yalom, 1998, p. 42). The first assumption is that many people who come
to therapy are suffering from an inability to establish and maintain satisfying relationships. The second is that therapy is a social microcosm, which
means that “eventually the interpersonal problems of the patient will manifest themselves in the here-and-now of the therapy relationship” (Yalom,
2002, p. 48). The third assumption is that working in the here-and-now
cultivates the therapeutic relationship by enriching the in-betweenness of
therapist and patient (Yalom, 1998, p. 428). The final assumption is that
working in the here-and-now allows the existential therapist to illuminate
how the existential issues such as personal freedom and assuming responsibility for oneself are influencing “the nature of the relationship of the
therapist and patient” and are affecting “every single therapy session”
(Yalom, 2002, p. xviii).

The Role of and Focus of Attention for the
Existential Therapist
Yalom’s conceptualization of his role as a therapist is that, “[w]e are all
in this together and there is no therapist and no person immune to the inherent tragedies of existence” (Yalom, 2002, p. 8). He states, “[t]his tragic but
realistic view of life has long influenced my relationship to those who seek
my help” (p. 7). Consequently, he believes that the most accurate view of the
therapeutic role is as a fellow traveler alongside his patients. This view
eliminates the “distinction between ‘them’ (the afflicted) and ‘us’ (the healers)” (p. 8). This view of the therapist as fellow traveler would likely cultivate the reciprocal, bidirectional aspects of presence described by Buber
(1937/1970), Cooper (2005), Marcel (1995), and Schneider and Leitner

Krug / Two Masters of Existential Therapy   19

(2002). In abolishing distinctions between the afflicted and the healers, Yalom
presupposes the necessity for the therapist to enter into an honest, intimate,
and self-disclosing relationship with the patient. “Be real,” he admonishes; “an
authentic human encounter in psychotherapy should never be sacrificed”
(Yalom, 2002, p. 76).
“Therapists must convey to the patient that their paramount task is to
build a relationship together that will itself become the agent of change”
(Yalom, 2002, p. 34.) Yalom believes change and growth will only occur
within the context of a safe and intimate relationship. It is within this safe
and intimate relationship that “a great many of our patients [who] have
conflicts in the realm of intimacy . . . obtain help . . . sheerly through experiencing an intimate relationship with the therapist” (p. 11). It is within this
safe and intimate relationship that patients are able to face and accept the
givens of existence and willingly choose to live differently. “The basic
encounter provides presence and a ‘being-with’ in the face of harsh existential facts of life . . . There is a deep comfort from relating intimately to other
fellow travelers in the world” (Yalom, 1998, p. 24). One can almost hear echoes of Buber (1937/1970) and Marcel (1995) in Yalom’s valuing the relationship and cultivating the realm of the in-between. Contrast this with Bugental’s
perspective, “[o]ur homeland is within and there we are sovereign—Until
we discover that fact anew . . . we are condemned to wander seeking solace where it cannot be found, in the outer world” (Bugental, 1978, p. 125).
We can see from Yalom’s and Bugental’s statements how differently each
values the therapeutic relationship. Yalom believes that the relationship
provides the intimacy of being with a fellow traveler that allows and
encourages the fellow traveler to face and accept the harsh realities of
existence. In contrast, even though Bugental acknowledges the need for an
intimate therapeutic relationship, he contends that solace cannot be found
in the other but rather in oneself; thus he seemingly does not value a focus
on the interpersonal as a method for cultivating change.
Yalom’s writings reveal a great deal of flexibility and comfort in moving
his therapeutic focusing, from the client’s intrapersonal processes to interpersonal processes and occasionally to his own intrapersonal processes,
depending on what is best for the individual in that moment. (Note again
that Yalom defines process only in interpersonal terms. He uses the term
psychodynamics when referring to intrapersonal processes; Yalom, 1980.).
The following quotes provide a sampling of his flexible focus.
On being present to intrapersonal (psychodynamic) processes Yalom
(1980) says, “[t]he proper method of understanding the inner world of another

20   Journal of Humanistic Psychology

individual is the ‘phenomenological’ one (p. 24). Look out the other’s window
. . . try to see the world as your patient sees it” (Yalom, 2002, p. 18). Moreover,
Yalom encourages intrapersonal reflection by encouraging his clients to bring
their dreams to therapy so that together they can explore the latent and implicit
experiential world of the person in therapy.
On being present to interpersonal processes Yalom (2002) says,
Therapy is invariably energized when it focuses on the relationship between
therapist and patient . . . human problems are largely relational . . . People
fall into despair because of their inability to form and maintain enduring and
gratifying interpersonal relationships. (p. 48)

This is true, but what is also true is one may fall into despair because of an
inability to form an enduring relationship with oneself.
On being present to intrapersonal processes of the therapist Yalom
(2002) says, “[I]t is counterproductive for the therapist to remain opaque
and hidden from the patient. There is every reason to reveal oneself to the
patient and no good reason for concealment” (p. 83).
It is important to remember that even though Yalom frequently shifts the
focus of attention, it is ultimately in the service of cultivating more intimacy and safety in the therapeutic relationship. One of Yalom’s central
presuppositions is that an intimate and safe therapeutic relationship is the
real agent of change. This is why he always brings his focus and his partner’s focus back to what is happening in the in-betweeness. “Nothing takes
precedence over the care and maintenance of my relationship with the
patient, and I attend carefully to every nuance of how we regard each other”
(Yalom, 2002, p. 11). He says he never lets an hour go by without checking
into the relationship, sometimes with a simple statement like: “How are you
and I doing today?” or “How are you experiencing the space between us
today?” (p. 12). Yalom’s focus on the interpersonal is, as noted earlier, the
signature of his particular approach to therapy.

The Value of the Therapeutic Relationship
It is apparent from the previous quotes that, for Yalom, the therapeutic
relationship is the “sine qua non for effective therapy . . . [a] proper therapeutic relationship is characterized by trust, warmth, empathic understanding,
and acceptance” (Yalom, 1998, p. 25). A proper and effective therapeutic
relationship is built by a focus on the relationship as it lives in the here-andnow. Explanations “keep patient and therapist tightly connected while the

Krug / Two Masters of Existential Therapy   21

real agent of change—the therapeutic relationship—is germinating” (Yalom,
2002, p. 176). The here-and-now focus germinates the relationship by enriching the in-betweenness of therapist and patient (Yalom, 1998, p. 428). Thus,
for Yalom, the therapeutic relationship is the agent of change and a focus on
the here-and-now builds it:
The therapeutic act of establishing a deeply intimate and authentic relationship, in itself, is healing. Such a relationship can become an antidote to loneliness and offer an internal reference point for patients, who learn that such
intimacy is rewarding and that they are capable of attaining it. Furthermore,
the work of creating and sustaining an authentic relationship with the therapist
is often excellent modeling for the formation of future relationships in a
patient’s life. (p. 428)

Summary of the Presuppositions
by Bugental and Yalom
The Essence of Human Beings and Their
Existential Predicament
Bugental’s central focus is on the experiencing subject whose truest
identity is a process, not a fixed substance. This self-as-process is always
searching and making meaning, constructing its world from its awareness.
Bugental does not, however, emphasize the existential predicament. Yalom’s
primary focus is not on the experiencing subject per se, but rather on how
the experiencing subject is relating to the existential givens—that is, the
subject’s existential predicament.

The Central Aim of Existential Therapy
The presuppositions by Bugental and Yalom concerning the essential
nature of human beings and their existential predicaments significantly
shape how each answer the question: “What needs to heal or change?”
Bugental, influenced by a presupposition of self-as-process, believes that
what needs to heal or change is self-alienation, which occurs because the
individual is pushed around by internalized outside influences. Yalom,
influenced by a presupposition that the givens of existence are rooted in
existence, believes that what needs to heal or change is the underlying
despair resulting from the individual’s inability to accept the human existential predicament. Both agree that the individual is somehow blocked, but

22   Journal of Humanistic Psychology

their presuppositions about essence and existence lead them to focus on
different approaches to heal this problem. Bugental emphasizes subjective
awareness and expanding potential, whereas Yalom encourages acceptance
of the existential limitations and activation of the will. Yalom’s interest in
group therapy leads to another aim, which is to heal interpersonal difficulties.
This goal stems from an assumption that an inability to maintain intimate
relationships causes people to despair. The way to heal this despair is to
illuminate destructive interpersonal patterns and to cultivate a capacity for
intimate relationships by forming an intimate therapeutic relationship.

The Meaning and Value of Working in the Here-And-Now
One of the most striking aspects of this research was discovering why
Bugental and Yalom understand what it means to work in the here-and-now
so differently. Although they both define this approach as a method that
focuses more on process than on content, and as a method that cultivates
presence, they define what they are with or present to quite differently. This
is because Bugental seems to assume that process refers to that which is
actual but unregarded within the client, that is, the client’s intrapersonal
processes. Whereas, Yalom assumes that process refers to the interpersonal
relationship between client and therapist. Yalom’s interest in the theory and
practice of group psychotherapy has influenced his embrace of the hereand-now method with which it is associated. For Bugental, working in the
here-and-now cultivates change because it illuminates what is actual but
unregarded within the individual. Subjective awareness is expanded and the
lost sense of being is recovered. But for Yalom, working in the here-andnow cultivates change because it illuminates existential issues of personal
freedom as they manifest in the therapeutic relationship and encourages the
individual to assume responsibility for his or her life; it cultivates the
therapeutic relationship by enriching the in-betweeness.

The Existential Therapist’s Role and Focus of Attention
The perspectives of Bugental and Yalom regarding the therapist’s role
and appropriate focus of attention were influenced by their presuppositions
concerning essence and existence, what needs to heal, and what approach
does heal. “Coach” Bugental is on the sidelines, focusing almost exclusively
on how his “athlete” (client) is intrapersonally blocked from performing at
his or her peak (searching with genuine presence). “Coach” Bugental
encourages his “athlete” to keep faith with himself or herself and not

Krug / Two Masters of Existential Therapy   23

attempt to seek solace in the outer world, because it cannot be found there.
“Fellow traveler” Yalom sits alongside his traveling companion, encouraging him or her to face and accept the unacceptable, implying, “I too experience the tragic dimensions of existence—you are not alone—we are in this
together.”

The Value of the Therapeutic Relationship
Another striking difference between Bugental and Yalom is the value
they place on the therapeutic relationship as a means to accelerate change
and growth. Bugental values the relationship as a necessary ingredient for
the real work of therapy (expanding subjective awareness) to proceed
smoothly, but he does not give it the prominent position that Yalom does.
Yalom believes that a safe and intimate relationship with his patient is not
simply necessary but is in fact the real agent of change.

Discussion and Conclusion
The Significance of Therapeutic Presuppositions
The present investigation reveals that personal experiences did influence
both Bugental and Yalom with regard to the formation of their presuppositions. This finding suggests how important it is for therapists to examine their
personal experiences because these may influence the formation of their
presuppositions, which in turn shape how they work with clients. Such an
examination grounds a therapist in his or her work by clarifying the rationale for using a particular approach. This awareness can also broaden perspective and guide a therapist to adapt and individualize the approach to
each client’s specific issues. Bugental spoke often of the need for a steadying perspective, referring to it as a pou sto, that is, “a place to stand,” or “a
base of operations” (Bugental, 1999, p. 85). I believe that to be an effective
and skillful therapist, one must be grounded in one’s therapeutic assumptions and that this is more helpful than mastering a variety of therapeutic
techniques.
Even though Bugental and Yalom work from somewhat different presuppositions, both have been extremely effective therapists. Why is this so?
My sense is that each can navigate the often murky therapeutic waters with
purposeful clarity because each is deeply grounded in his approach and
therefore believes in its powers. A solid belief in their approach provides

24   Journal of Humanistic Psychology

them with steady support as they attempt to dissolve the blocks that constrict and imprison. But to believe in one’s approach, as my two mentors
do, one must first know, very specifically, what the basis and rationale for
that approach is. Examining one’s therapeutic presuppositions is the beginning of this process of understanding.

The Presuppositions of Bugental and Yalom
and the Cultivation of Presence
The results of this investigation reveal that the presuppositions by
Bugental and Yalom do influence their understanding of what it means to
cultivate presence in the here-and-now, which in turn shapes how they practice existential psychotherapy. They share a number of similar presuppositions. For example, they both believe that working in the here-and-now is the
most effective therapeutic method because what is actual in the room is what
is real. Bugental and Yalom both believe that if the therapist consistently
provides here-and-now experiences of self and world, the client will likely
progress in self-awareness, self-direction, and assumption of responsibility.
However, the investigation reveals that Yalom and Bugental have a
number of different presuppositions related to what constitutes change and
what helps a person change and grow. If we compare their presuppositions
on the nature of existential therapy through Tillich’s lenses, we see that
each man emphasizes one-half of the whole. Bugental’s presupposition
regarding self-as-process focuses his attention on the individual’s everemerging becoming. Yalom’s presupposition regarding the repressed self
focuses his attention on de-repressing awareness of the harsh facts of existence. Thus, if we combine Bugental’s focus on essence and Yalom’s focus
on the existential predicament, we create the union of essentialism and
existentialism for which Tillich argued.
If we compare their presuppositions on what it means to work in the
here-and-now, we can understand the difference in each therapist’s focus—
that is, Bugental focus on cultivating intrapersonal presence and Yalom’s
on cultivating interpersonal presence. One of Bugental’s most significant
contributions to the field is his attention to the preverbal, kinesthetic, and
tacit dimensions of subjective experience. One of Yalom’s most significant
contributions is his attention to the development of a safe and intimate
therapeutic relationship. Meta-analytic research indicates that these and
other contextual or human factors of therapy are primarily responsible for
explaining therapeutic effectiveness, leading the researcher to recently suggest that all therapists might benefit from an exposure to the principles of

Krug / Two Masters of Existential Therapy   25

existential therapy (Wampold, 2001, 2008). It is hoped that the present
study has successfully illustrated the relationship between the cultivation of
intra and interpersonal presence and these contextual factors, thus further
clarifying how and why change occurs.
The present study reveals that Bugental’s and Yalom’s points of view
contribute an exceedingly important element to this therapeutic endeavor.
Indeed, as stated earlier, each viewpoint is one half of a whole. As May
(1983) suggests, because Mitwelt (the world of interrelationships) and
Eigenwelt (the world of self-relatedness) are simultaneous modes of being
neither should be emphasized to the exclusion of the other. Each therapist’s
approach focuses on cultivating a different dimension of personal presence—
presence with self and presence with self and others. A person’s awareness
of both dimensions allows for an appreciation of how intimacy with self as
well as intimacy with other is limited. Each focus is appropriate at different
times and with different people depending on their psychological issues. It
is essential that a therapist tailors the therapy to the needs of the client and
when brought together, and applied appropriately, the personal and interpersonal are of optimal value to the therapeutic work. Thus, by integrating
the intrapersonal approach of Bugental with the interpersonal approach of
Yalom, the theory and practice of existential psychotherapy is enriched.

References
Buber, M. (1970). I and thou. (W. Kaufmann, Trans.). New York: Scribner’s. (Original work
published 1937)
Bugental, J. F. T. (1963, August). The third force in psychology. Paper presented at the meeting
of the American Association for Humanistic Psychology, Philadelphia, PA.
Bugental, J. F. T. (1965). The search for authenticity: An existential-analytic approach to
psychotherapy. (Exp. ed.) New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Bugental, J. F. T. (1976). The search for existential identity. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Bugental, J. F. T. (1978). Psychotherapy and process. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Bugental, J. F. T. (1981). The search for authenticity: An existential-analytic approach to
psychotherapy. (Exp. ed.) New York: Irvington.
Bugental, J.F.T. (1983). The one absolute necessity in psychotherapy. The Script, 13(8), 1-2.
Bugental, J. F. T. (1987). The art of the psychotherapist. New York: Norton.
Bugental, J. F. T. (1999). Psychotherapy isn’t what you think. Phoenix, AZ: Zeig, Tucker &
Theisen.
Cooper, M. (2003). Existential therapies. London: Sage.
Cooper, M. (2005). Therapists’ experiences of relational depth: A qualitative interview study.
Counseling and Psychotherapy Research, 5, 87-95.
Corsini, R., & Wedding, D. (Eds.). (1995). Current psychotherapies. Itasca, IL: Peacock.
DeCarvalho, R. (1991). The founders of humanistic psychology. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Friedman, M. (1985). The healing dialogue in psychotherapy. New York: Jason Aronson.

26   Journal of Humanistic Psychology
Geller, S. M., & Greenberg, L. S. (2002). Therapeutic presence: Therapist’s experience of presence in the psychotherapy encounter. Person-centered and Experiential Psychotherapies,
1(1-2), 71-86.
Marcel, G. (1995). The philosophy of existentialism. New York: Citadel Press.
May, R. (1958). Contributions of existential psychotherapy. In R. May, E. Angel, & H. Ellenberger
(Eds.), Existence: A new dimension in psychiatry and psychology (pp. 37-91). New York:
Basic Books.
May, R. (1983). The discovery of being. New York: Norton.
Schneider, K. J. (2003). Existential-humanistic psychotherapies. In A. S. Gurman & S. B. Messer
(Eds.), Essential psychotherapies: Theory and practice (pp. 149-181). New York: Guilford
Press.
Schneider, K. J., & Leitner, L. (2002). Humanistic psychotherapy. In M. Hersen & W. H. Sledge
(Eds.), The encyclopedia of psychotherapy (Vol. 1, pp. 949-957). New York: Elsevier
Science/Academic Press.
Schneider, K. J., & May, R. (1995). The psychology of existence: An integrative, clinical
perspective. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Schulenberg, S. E. (2003). Approaching terra incognita with James F. T. Bugental: An interview and an overview of existential-humanistic psychotherapy. Journal of Contemporary
Psychotherapy, 33, 273-285.
Serlin, I. (1999). Interview with Irwin Yalom. Review of Existential Psychology and
Psychiatry, 24(1-3), 142-145.
Tillich, P. (1962). Existentialism and psychotherapy, and the nature of man. In S. Doniger
(Ed.), The nature of man in theological and psychological perspective (pp. 42-51).
Plainview, NY: Books for Libraries Press.
van Deurzen-Smith, E. (1997). Everyday mysteries: Existential dimensions of psychotherapy.
New York: Brunner-Routledge.
Wampold, B. E. (2001). The great psychotherapy debate: Models, methods, and findings.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Wampold, B. (2008, February 6). Existential-integrative psychotherapy comes of age.
[Review of the book Existential-integrative psychotherapy: Guideposts to the core of
practice]. PsychCritiques 53, Release 6, Article 1.
Whitehead, A. N. (1978). Process and reality. New York: Free Press.
Yalom, I. (1975). The theory and practice of group psychotherapy (2nd ed.). New York: Basic
Books.
Yalom, I. (1980). Existential psychotherapy. New York: Basic Books.
Yalom, I. (1989). Love’s executioner. New York: Harper Perennial.
Yalom, I. (1998). The Yalom reader. New York: Basic Books.
Yalom, I. (1999). Momma and the meaning of life. New York: Basic Books.
Yalom, I. (2002). The gift of therapy. New York: HarperCollins.

Orah T. Krug, PhD, is a licensed psychotherapist with a private practice in
Oakland, California. She is also a founder and the clinical training director of the
Existential-Humanistic Institute of San Francisco. Most recently, she coauthored
a book with Kirk Schneider entitled, Existential-Humanistic Therapy. This textbook is part of a monograph series for the American Psychological Association.

