EXISTENTIALISM AND EXISTENTIAL PSYCHOTHERAPY
Emmy van Deurzen
INTRODUCTION
Philosophy and psychotherapy
It is somewhat surprising that philosophy and psychotherapy do not have a more
distinguished history of co-operation. Both disciplines are concerned with human well
being and human living, the one in a theoretical manner, the other in a much more
pragmatic way. One would expect psychotherapists to have noted the central
importance of philosophy to the practice of their own profession and draw on
philosophy as a source for understanding their clients’ predicaments. Unfortunately
this has not been the case. Psychotherapists have on the whole neglected the study
of philosophy, which they have frequently dismissed as irrelevant and they have
turned to medicine and psychology as the disciplines of theoretical reference for their
domain. This may well be because of the aridity and high level of abstraction of
much of western philosophy. This is rather ironic as Hellenistic philosophy several
millennia ago set out as a disciplined search for the well lived human life, or
eudaimonia. Philosophy then proposed a form of dialectical debate where individuals
were encouraged to seek to clarify their beliefs about the world in order to come to a
better understanding of their conflicts and the objectives of their everyday existence
(Nussbaum 1994, Vlastos 1991).
Philosophy to a large extent lost track of its own mission to understand, clarify and
sustain the concrete realities of ordinary people and as it spawned the sciences
became increasingly abstract and detached from its former objectives. This is
particularly evident in logical positivism. Nevertheless there has always been a
strand of philosophy that concerned itself with human issues, which is that of ethical
philosophy. There are a number of philosophers, like Kant, Rousseau, Spinoza,
Hume and Hegel who have made important contributions in this way and they should
be essential reading for trainee psychotherapists. It is however with the new impulse
of the philosophies of existence, particularly those of Kierkegaard (1844, 1846, 1855)
and Nietzsche (1881, 1882, 1886, 1887, 1888) that philosophers themselves
became directly interested again in the concrete questions of human existence. The
philosophies of Kierkegaard and Nietzsche draw attention to the subjective life of the
individual and in this way provide an excellent basis for the kind of philosophy that
can inform the practice of psychotherapy.
With the advent of Husserl’s
phenomenology (Husserl 1900, 1913, 1925, 1929) a more concrete methodology of
investigation of human issues was proposed enabling existentialism to come into its
own with the work of philosophers such as Heidegger (1927, 1954, 1957), Sartre
(1939, 1943, 1948) and Merleau Ponty (1945, 1964, 1968).
Existentialism became a popular movement as people reclaimed philosophy as
being of personal relevance. Here at last was an approach that would give them a
handle on the moral choices, existential crises and constant challenges of daily
reality. Philosophy was shown to be capable of providing a forum for debate where
light could be thrown on the far-reaching changes that humanity had to negotiate in

1

the modern and post-modern era. It was therefore predictable that existentialism
should also generate a new form of psychotherapy in which medical considerations
were replaced with wider human ones and where a person’s particular problems
were set off against the background of a general existential perspective.
Existential psychotherapy
Existential psychotherapy is the only established form of psychotherapy that is
directly based in philosophy rather than in psychology. It was founded at the
beginning of the century, on the one hand by the original work of Karl Jaspers in
Germany, ( 1951, 1963, 1964) which itself influenced Heidegger’s thinking and on
the other hand by the work of two Swiss psychiatrists, Ludwig Binswanger (1946,
1963) and Medard Boss (1957, 1962, 1979, 1988), who were in turn inspired by the
work of Heidegger to create an alternative method of dealing with emotional and
mental distress. All three turned from psychiatry to philosophy, in an attempt to
understand the human predicament, paradoxes and conflicts of their patients. These
early applications of existentialist philosophy to psychotherapy have been followed
by a number of other and varied attempts, as for instance in the work of Frankl
(1946, 1955, 1967), May (1958, 1969, 1983), Laing (1960, 1961, 1964, 1967), Szasz
(1961, 1965, 1992) Yalom (1980, 1989) and van Deurzen (1984, 1988, 19, 1997).
There has however continued to be great diversity between these and other authors
as no official or formal rendering of existential psychotherapy has ever been agreed.
To confuse matters further existential principles have also been applied more
indirectly to psychotherapy as part of the humanistic psychology movement, for
instance in Person-centred and Gestalt approaches to psychotherapy, which often
pride themselves in their existential origins. Personal-construct therapies also have a
basis in the phenomenological approach and there are a number of psychoanalytic
writers who take existential ideas into account as well. All of these approaches
however tend to focus on the intra-personal dimensions of human existence and they
have formulated psychological theories that do not allow the philosophical dimension
to come to the fore or to be central. Radical existential psychotherapy focuses on
the inter-personal and supra-personal dimensions, as it tries to capture and question
people’s world-views. Such existential work aims at clarifying and understanding
personal values and beliefs, making explicit what was previously implicit and unsaid.
Its practice is primarily philosophical and seeks to enable a person to live more
deliberately, more authentically and more purposefully, whilst accepting the
limitations and contradictions of human existence. It has much in common with the
newly developed practice of philosophical consultancy, which is just finding its feet in
Germany, the Netherlands, Israel and the United States (Lahav 1995, Achenbach
1984, Hoogendijk 1991).
There continues to be a lack of systematic theorizing about existential psychotherapy
and a lack of research to demonstrate the effectiveness of this kind of work. This is
mostly because the existential approach resists formalisation and opposes the
fabrication of a method that can be taught as a technique and followed automatically.
Existential psychotherapy has to be reinvented and recreated by every therapist and
with every new client. It is essentially about investigating human existence and the

2

particular preoccupations of one individual and this has to be done without
preconceptions or set ways of proceeding. There has to be complete openness to
the individual situation and an attitude of wonder that will allow the specific
circumstances and experiences to unfold in their own right. We can however
distinguish a number of themes that will predictably emerge in this process. The
following list of existential issues is a personal selection based on the compilation of
the work of the major philosophers of existence. The order in which the issues are
presented and discussed is based on my experience of teaching trainee
psychotherapists some of the predictable patterns that emerge when clients in
psychotherapy present their concerns and begin to examine their lives in a
philosophical manner. Of course life is a great deal more complex than this list
suggests and one can look at the same issues in many different ways. What follows
is a brief description of my particular pathway towards clarity. It is important to
remember that existential psychotherapists aim to assist their clients in finding their
own.
EXISTENTIAL ISSUES

• Ontological description
The first thing to keep in mind when applying philosophy to psychotherapeutic
practice is that when philosophers think about human living they do so not as
anthropologists or psychologists. They do not primarily preoccupy themselves with
concrete experiences, but they rather allow themselves to build theories about
human living in an abstract sense. They are concerned to describe the ontological
dimension of life and only secondarily come to the concrete experience of the
individual. They try to pinpoint what it is that makes human living possible and
difficult in the first place. Ontological descriptions are thus descriptions that tell us
what the sine qua non of human existence is. They sketch out the conditions without
which there would be no real human life. It is extremely useful to ask oneself what
the basic foundations of human living are. Heidegger’s book Being and Time
(Heidegger 1927) is just such an attempt at describing the essential being in the
world of humans. His consideration of human beings as Dasein, or being-in-theworld, redefines questions of self and psychology as questions of living and
philosophy. His sharp thinking about what makes human being possible provides a
useful map of existence, which can certainly be argued with and revised, but which
nevertheless asks important questions about people in general, allowing for a closer
examination of the particular individual life afterwards. Of course there are many
such possible maps and ontological theories to be found in philosophy. Existential
philosophy is particularly focussed on the predictable dilemmas of human living that
will be regularly encountered when doing psychotherapy.

• Meaning of life
According to Heidegger the most fundamental philosophical question is: ‘Why is
there something rather than nothing?’ We do not actually know the answer to this
question, but it remains a fundamental question to ask ourselves if we are going to
be serious about examining human living from scratch. Clients ask themselves this
question regularly and in particular they are unclear about the meaning of their own

3

life. Philosophers show such questioning to be necessary in order to become a selfreflective human being. Doubts about the meaning of life are the beginning of all
philosophy. Doubt and wonder enable us to rediscover the miracle of being.
Children have not lost this ability to wonder and they ask the question ‘why’ at the
most inopportune moments. Adults tend to wonder about the meaning of life
particularly when things are difficult and no longer self-evident. Once upon a time
the meaning of life was given by religion or by social rule. These days meaning is
often looked at in a far more sceptical manner (see Tantam, this volume). It is
therefore not surprising that people often find themselves in what we can be called a
vacuum of meaning (Frankl 1946,1955). The experience of meaninglessness
becomes a major problem in many people’s lives and it may lead to a number of
concrete difficulties, which may look like personality problems or other forms of
pathology. Psychotherapists, psychologists or psychiatrists often have considerable
difficulties in recognizing the validity of philosophical questioning. They are reluctant
to engage in theoretical discussions with clients and patients who are seemingly
disturbed, but who actually may be in search of meaning. We can only engage in
such discussions if we have been willing to question our own lives and can recognize
that anxieties and doubts about meaning do not have to be equated with personal
pathology or mental illness (Szasz 1961, 1965, 1992).
It is by no means easy to be truly available to help others in finding meaning in their
lives when their existence is in crisis. The meaning of life is never given and can not
be transmitted unless a person is willing to search for it independently.
Phenomenologists recognized that meaning making is one of the defining
characteristics of human consciousness. It could therefore be argued that the
meaning of human living is to learn to give it meaning. In order to come to a position
from which we can learn to give meaning we have to first come to a point of doubt
and a realization of the lack of intrinsic meaning in our lives. Frankl (1946) spoke of
three sources of meaning. Firstly through taking from the world what is there,
learning to savour and appreciate what is already given to us, as in aesthetic
enjoyment of nature or the pleasures of the senses. Secondly to give to the world
and add new enjoyments to it through acts of our own creativity and by giving to
others in this way as well. Thirdly by our attitudinal values, which could include
suffering, when it is necessary to endure the harsh conditions we may be exposed
to. If there is no alternative to our suffering, it is always possible to find an attitude of
human dignity by enduring the hard labour, pain and disappointments, Frankl argues,
even when we have to face up to extremes of torture and deprivation.
• Existential anxiety
The experience of meaninglessness and the creation of meaning are closely related
to the experience of Angst or existential anxiety. This occurs against the backdrop of
the personal realization that I am ultimately alone in the world and that I have to
contend with my mortality and other limitations, taking responsibility for myself in the
face of endless challenges and confusions. This crisis of meaning was first
described by Kierkegaard (1844, 1855), who thought that it was a great deal
preferable to begin to feel anxious about life and question it, rather than to live in the
despair of those who deny the need to think for themselves. Kierkegaard thought

4

that human beings would only gradually become capable of such questioning. He
believed that people are vegetative to start out with, not taking much notice of the
meaning of anything at first. They then grow sentient as they are beginning to follow
their senses and relate more intensely to the world. After this they grow conscious of
the world around them and as they begin to form judgements about things,
eventually they become knowing about some of what is. Out of knowing can grow
self-knowing as we apply the ability to think and recognize, compare and judge for
ourselves. Out of self-knowing can come a self-awareness that leads to autonomy
and the ability to make choices and decisions for oneself. This process plunges us
into Angst, or existential anxiety, likened by Kierkegaard to a dizziness of freedom.
He thought that experiencing Angst was the sine qua non of us assuming our
responsibility as individuals and that without it we could never come face to face with
the demands our life makes on us.

Anxiety or Angst is a core concept in existential philosophy, which sees it as the
basic ingredient of vitality. Learning to be anxious in the right way, i.e. not too much
or too little is the key to living a reflective, meaningful human life. As Kierkegaard put
it:
Whoever has learnt to be anxious in the right way has learnt the ultimate.
(Kierkegaard 1844:155)
Anxiety has to be distinguished from fear. The former is a generalized feeling of
Unheimlichkeit (Heidegger 1927), of not being at ease, or at home in one’s world,
whereas the latter has a concrete object. It is anxiety that allows us to define
ourselves as a separate person and to become responsive and responsible as well
as aware and alert. Although we may become overwhelmed with anxiety, so that it
becomes counterproductive, on the whole anxiety is to be seen as a positive
breakthrough towards the goal of the fully lived human life.

• How are we to live our lives?
In this sense existential psychotherapy does not reassure people when they come to
talk about the predicaments and conflicts in their lives. They are encouraged to
consider their anxiety and their problems as a valid starting point for the work that
has to be done. When people wonder what is wrong with their life it is tempting to
treat such questioning as symptomatic of emotional problems, but existential
psychotherapy sees it as an attempt at coming to grips with philosophical dilemmas.
Most of us are all likely to encounter such dilemmas sooner or later and people
should be assisted in getting clarity on how they want to live when such issues arise.
People easily lose their sense of direction. Moral and ethical issues are increasingly
obscure in the world we live in today. It may be helpful to turn to Nietzsche’s
challenge (Nietzsche 1883) that we should re-value all values. He insisted that our
thinking had gone astray and that much that people took for granted had to be
reconsidered. He thought it crucial to consider afresh what a good human life
consists of. In order to do so it is useful to turn to the map of human existence that

5

can be pieced together from the writings of existential philosophers, so that we can
find our way through the obstacles of human living without losing our bearings.

• Intentionality
The lynchpin of human existence is the concept of intentionality. It was Husserl’s
phenomenology that established intentionality as its new foundation following
Brentano’s original idea (Husserl 1900, 1913, 1929). Phenomenology posits that
human consciousness is essentially transparent and in this sense is always and
necessarily connected to a world. It is never independent and always has an object.
As we are non-substantial, transparent, beings we cannot but reach out to a world.
We are always in relation. Through us the world comes to light. We always, think,
do, desire, imagine something. There always is some contents to our mind. It is
possible to set aside our automatic ways of intending things and judging things and
take heed of our tendency to do so. We can learn to be disciplined about our
intentionality and through the phenomenological reduction question all the automatic
judgements we normally take for granted. Husserl called this process ‘coming to
things themselves’ and it is often referred to as the epoche. It consists of putting our
usual assumptions about the world in brackets. This does not mean that we get rid
of them or pretend they do not exist, but rather that we deal with them separately so
that we can describe the situation, object of our attention or other person we are
dealing with fairly and as it really is. To make oneself consistently query one’s
assumptions about the world and reconsider it with a cleared attitude of openness is
obviously extremely relevant to the practice of psychotherapy. What we find when
we apply this manner of observing other people is that they themselves are always in
a relationship of intentionality to the world they live in. It is their mode of being in the
world that we need to turn to next.

• Lived world
Husserl spoke of the Lebenswelt, or lived world to describe the sort of universe that
we live in. Everyone has their own perspective on the world, their own particular
point of reference their own atmosphere and outlook. The lived world of the cat is
obviously different to that of the dog or the bird for instance. When a cat comes into
a room it may seek out cosy hiding places, while a dog may orientate himself by his
sense of smell, looking for good spots to lift a leg on, whereas a bird might be
focused on finding high places to perch on. The same room would seem a very
different place to different people. In an even more complex manner they have a
world of their own. This world determines where people go and what they want and
do. Heidegger (1927) described the human world in quite a lot of detail, showing it to
always have a horizon, a home ground and a foreign ground. We are always at a
certain distance from things, although our relation to things might be determined by
our intentional stance towards them more than by the actual space that separates
us. When I run for the bus for instance, it seems closer to me than the ground that I
run over. I see it as near and if it suddenly pulls out the severance that I experience
and the sudden distance between me and the object of my desire may plunge me
into confusion and disappointment. To describe the experiences of my world as
completely as possible and without the usual assumption that I already know what I
am describing leads to new insights into what human living entails.

6

• Situations
We discover immediately that people are always connected to the world in a number
of concrete ways. Heidegger in this context spoke of our ‘thrownness’. He said that
we are always thrown into a world that is already there to start with and into which
we simply get inserted. It is important to recognize the factual situations that we are
confronted with. We are part of a certain culture, a certain environment with a
particular climate and history, a certain society and a specific situation. It is only
within the givens of that situation that we can exercise our own choices. Sartre
(1943) called this our facticity and he recognized that we can never release
ourselves from this, even though we can choose our position in relation to it. In
terms of psychotherapy it also means that it may be necessary to look at people’s
problems in a structural way. Instead of seeing everything as the person’s personal,
emotional or internal problem, problems can be seen as part of an overall situation.
Context is crucial and has to be taken into account.

• Limit situations
Of all the situations in which we can find ourselves there are certain ones that are
irrevocable. These situations have to be accepted. We cannot avoid them or
overcome them: we have to learn to live with them. Heidegger emphasised the
importance of death as a marker of our finite nature. Death in this sense is not to be
taken as something happening to us at some point later, but as something that is
relevant to us right now. The realities of our mortality and of our incompleteness
have to be faced for us to become aware of and true to our nature, which is to be
finite. Heidegger considered that the reality of our death is that it completes us. The
recognition of the inevitability of death gives us a certainty that nothing else can give
us. The fear in the face of death allows us to claim back our individuality, our
authentic being, as we are inevitably alone in death and find ourselves much
sobered and humbled by the knowledge of our mortality. Death, according to
Heidegger:
amounts to the disclosedness of the fact that Dasein exists as thrown
being towards its end. (Heidegger 1927:251)
In other words: death is part of me and to accept my living towards this end gives my
life back to me in a new way.
Jaspers (1951, 1971) spoke of limit situations as those situations, which define our
humanity. Sooner or later we inevitably come up against guilt, death, pain, suffering
and failure. The philosophical take on this is that we should encourage people to
come to terms with some of the inevitable conflicts and problems of living whilst also
asking themselves how they can move forward in a new and desirable direction.
Limit situations are what bring us in confrontation with ourselves in a decisive and
fundamentally disturbing way. They evoke anxiety and therefore release us from our
tendency to be untrue and evasive about ourselves and our lives.

7

• Self-deception
Sartre was particularly adamant that as human beings we try to pretend that we are
solid and definite in the way that objects are. People do not like to face up to their
fundamental nothingness and mortality. We think we can pretend to be like a stone
or a solid thing, but in fact in doing so we are deceiving ourselves, reinventing
ourselves in bad faith (Sartre 1943). To be in bad faith is an almost unavoidable
state of play for human beings as we seem to find it particularly difficult to face up to
the implications of our freedom as consciousness. One of the objectives of human
living is to become increasingly aware of our ability to choose to live deliberately
rather than by default and to diminish the extent to which we seek to tell ourselves
false stories about ourselves. Sartre said that the only choice we do not have is not
to choose because not to choose involves a choice as well.
In fact we are a freedom which chooses, but we do not choose to be free.
(Sartre 1943:485)
The coward is fulfilling the project of cowardice, in the same way in which the hero is
fulfilling the project of heroism. They can both either choose to take responsibility for
their choice or pretend that it just happened to them and is not open to question.
Heidegger saw the existence of other people, with whom we are fallen into a world
where the anonymous ‘They’ decides about our actions and our identity as the major
obstacle to authenticity. He recognized, as Sartre did, that human beings are
condemned to living inauthentically for much of the time, but that we should
nevertheless aim to retrieve ourselves from inauthenticity. It is the anxiety of our
possible death and our discovery that we are alone in the face of our own fate and
destiny that allows us ultimately to take ourselves seriously and posit ourselves
firmly, resolutely as individuals facing death.

• Time
This is when it also becomes possible to become more aware of the dimension of
time, which is a crucial category of human living. It is always today and not tomorrow
or yesterday. I am always no longer and not yet. We orientate ourselves in relation
to the various ways in which we stand out in time. Our lives are a constant process
of transformation that we cannot stop. Heidegger spoke of the three ec-stasies of
time (Heidegger 1927:329), which are the ways in which we stand out in the past, in
the present and in the future. We go back to ourselves in terms of remembering the
past. We let ourselves be encountered by the world in the present and we reach out
towards ourselves in the future. The past (Erbe) is the legacy we go forward with
and which we can recollect in different ways. This means that we can re-present the
past to ourselves in a new and creative manner. The present is our fate (Schiksal),
which we have the task to live out as fully as possible, obviously drawing on the
legacy of the past and making ourselves present to our own fate by facing our
limitations rather than hiding away in inauthenticity. The future is our destiny
(Geschick) and the destination that we choose for ourselves in relation to what is
available to us. Our destination is thus created from our legacy and our fate. All of
my actions are full of the awareness of my temporal change. There is decay and
development around me. Life consists of movement, transformation and action. All of

8

these are only possible in time. My existence is historic. It creates a story. How I
create this story is of utmost importance. Existential psychotherapy is about
retracing the story and reorienting a person in time.

• The fragile self
The way in which I tell my story is the way in which I create a self. Existential
philosophy does not posit the notion of a fixed and determined self. There is no such
thing as an essential solid self, only intentionality and being in the world. Sartre used
to say that existence preceded essence. I come into the world first and exist and
only after that do I create a self for myself out of my actions. The self is a window
on the world and out of our living in time and standing out in the world we become
what we are. Sartre went as far as to say that people were the sum of their actions.
Therefore the choices we make are constitutive of the sort of person we become.
We are constantly in the process of creating a self, yet when we try to capture this
self, we realize it is as if we were trying to catch our shadow: it moves away from us
and changes as we try to fix it. We cannot be a definitive something. Our stories
change as we live and so we are changed too. As we saw before the only way in
which we can believe in a self is by being in bad faith, i.e. by using self-deception.
Any image we create of ourselves is in a sense a lie: it never tells the full story about
who we are or could be. We have to re-create ourselves every day and to become
aware of this is to become authentic and true to the self which isn’t one. We are thus
doomed to feel a sense of incompleteness as life requires us to try ever harder to be
equal to what we are capable of, even though we can never achieve it.

• Existential guilt
Most of us will therefore have a frequent sensation of unease with ourselves. The
awareness that we are not true to our full human ability and that we live
inauthentically will lead to the experience of existential guilt. In existential guilt we
hear the voice of our conscience and this must be taken extremely seriously. We are
not guilty because we have fallen short by other people’s standards or because we
have behaved badly, but simply because we fall short as human beings. It is
important to note that most existential philosophers assume that human living will
inevitably expose us to falling short and therefore to feeling existential guilt. We are
always indebted to life. We are always capable of being more alive, more open,
more true to the potential of human consciousness than we actually are. We are
therefore condemned to feel existential guilt, as we are condemned to feel existential
anxiety; largely because we are, as Sartre said condemned to be free. Heidegger
greatly valued the call of conscience which he believed to warn us of our existential
guilt, thus bringing us back into confrontation with our human fate, allowing us to
rediscover our authentic being.
The call is the call of care. Being guilty constitutes the Being to which we give
the name of “care”. (Heidegger 1927:333)
To become authentic requires us to take into account our essential ways of existing
and conduct ourselves accordingly. All of these modalities of existence, which
Heidegger refers to as the existentialia are consequences of our intentional nature.

9

• Care
Our intentional nature, and the nature of our consciousness as the place where
being comes to light, as Heidegger put it, makes us care. People are the custodians
of Being because they are nothing in themselves but need to reflect something, in
order to fully exist. As transparent entities human beings are therefore condemned
to care. The world always matters to us and we have to take account of our care for
the world, which manifests in lots of different ways. It is therefore not the question
whether we care, but how. Care is not to be understood as a negative or a positive,
but rather as the inevitable mode of our relating to a world that is of importance to us.
Heidegger speaks of care as manifesting as our concern for things and our solicitude
for people. But our care also manifests in some specific ways in which we are in the
world and relate to it.

• Mood
The fact that the world always matters to us is evident in the way in which we are
always in a mood. We cannot be separate from the world, but always respond to it in
a particular state of mind. Heidegger (1927: 134) called this: Befindlichkeit, or the
way in which I find myself. This state of mind is a response to the atmosphere
created between the world, and me by my care for what is happening in it.
Stimmung, or attunement, is the way in which I respond to the atmospheres, the way
in which, like a musical instrument I am attuned in a particular way to the world
around me. Through my resonance with the world I disclose the world in a particular
way. My mood colours the world as it is also coloured by it.
My own being is
disclosed in my moods at the same time as it discloses the world. Moods are
therefore invaluable indicators of what is happening between my world and me. We
can never not be in a mood and we cannot just stop a mood. We can only get out of
one mood by getting into another. Sartre elaborated on this idea of the central
position of mood or mode of being by describing emotions as active rather than
passive. He spoke of emotion as a kind of magic by which I alter the world and
therefore myself in one blow (Sartre 1939).

• Understanding
As human beings we can respond to the world through our emotions, but we can
also through our emotions and our ability to reflect on them come to grasp things in a
new way. This new way of understanding (verstehen) is not just about human
intelligence and the capacity for calculating things in the world. Heidegger makes
the distinction between Vernunft (rational mind) and Verstand (understanding) which
is our ability to see the whole of what is rather than analyse things with our mind
(Heidegger 1927:144). Understanding discloses the potential of our being, as it
shows us what we are capable of. In his later work he made the distinction between
calculative thinking and meditative thinking (Heidegger 1954). He showed how
important it was to learn to think again in this more encompassing meditative manner
where we are open to the world and receive it with gratitude for what is, rather than
trying to subject it to the analysis and manipulations that our calculative mind
imposes. Heidegger suggests that we use Sicht, or vision to understand the world
and our relation to it. Umsicht, or the vision of looking around one, applies to objects

10

and we need to approach objects with the care of circumspection. We use
Rucksicht, which suggests a kind of withholding, in relation to other people, which
manifests as considerateness. Finally and perhaps most importantly we employ
Durchsicht, or seeing through things in relation to ourselves. It is thus transparency
that brings into being careful understanding of ourselves.

• Discourse
Language is an essential vehicle for understanding our modes of being. Heidegger
speaks of discourse as the third essential mode of being (together with mood and
understanding). Discourse is a broader concept than language and includes it.
Although discourse is obviously linked to language it can also manifest as silence.
We have to struggle to retrieve valuable discourse out of all the possible misuses of
talking. Speech can turn to idle talk (Gerede rather than Rede). Discourse can
flounder in curiosity, which is a moving across the surface of things, distracted by
their novelty, as we collect and accumulate useless information. In this way we
drown in existence and we go under in ambiguity. (Merleau Ponty 1945). Discourse
is to be used carefully for it to become a valuable resource for the manifestation of
being. In language or in silent thought we can capture and express ourselves in
relation to life and begin to come to terms with our essential function of being the
shepherds of being.

• Communication
The mastery of language makes human communication possible.
However
communication is a lot more complex than simple speech. Heidegger was aware
that Mitsein, or being with others, was part of our essential nature. He also
described people as at the mercy of the anonymous other who defines their being-inthe-world. Authentic being is only possible when we set ourselves aside from others.
Sartre described our struggle with others as a desperate attempt at survival and at
gaining a false sense of security. He saw human communication, which is by no
means only about language as taking place either in a sadistic, a masochistic or an
indifferent way. We can try to dominate the other or we can submit or withdraw from
communication altogether. In sharp contrast to Sartre’s pessimistic view of human
relations and human communication the philosopher Martin Buber (1923,1929) saw
the possibility of a more positive way of human interaction. He distinguished
between I-it and I-Thou modes of relating. He noted that the way we relate to others
determines what kind of person we become. In the I-It mode of relating I treat the
other as an object and become an object myself. In this mode I see the other only
for part of what the other is capable of and at the same time become partial myself.
In the I-Thou mode I relate to the other for all the other is capable of and I relate thus
with my whole being as well. The I-Thou mode of relating has a spiritual dimension.
Buber described the way in which we create a space between others and ourselves.
In this space human communication becomes a reality. He called this space the inbetween. True dialogue can be created in this space when we release our selfreserve and reach out to the other with our whole being.
Where un-reserve has ruled, even wordlessly, between men, the word of
dialogue has happened sacramentally. (Buber 1929:3-4).

11

• Mastered irony
Kierkegaard believed that language should be used with what he calls mastered
irony. This requires the ability to detach oneself sufficiently from one’s situation to be
able to see oneself in some perspective. He claims that those who lack irony do not
have even the beginning of a personal life. To have a personal life and be able to be
objective about oneself and subjective about others is to Kierkegaard a primary
objective.
Most men are subjective toward themselves and objective toward all others,
frightfully objective sometimes-but the task is precisely to be objective toward
oneself and subjective toward all others. (Kierkegaard 1967, IV 4542).
He distinguishes fanatics, who cling to certain beliefs and nihilists who deny all
beliefs, but sees them both as lacking in courage. In mastered irony one questions
one’s own beliefs while still being committed to them. As usual the challenge is to be
able to live in the tension between opposites.

• Paradox
This idea that human living takes place in the tension between opposing forces is
present throughout existential philosophy. Most obviously this is represented by
Heidegger’s (1927) description of the tension between life and death, or by Sartre’s
descriptions of the tension between being and nothingness, expressed in the tension
between being-for-itself (the being of consciousness) and being-in-itself (the being of
objects) (Sartre 1943). Kierkegaard for his part described this tension as one
between the infinite and the finite. He claimed that one can get too much drawn into
either the finite or the infinite and that the challenge of living is to maintain the right
sort of tension between both. The person who is immersed in the finite gets caught
up in the dangers of concrete living. The person who gets too immersed in the
infinite is the dreamer, who merges with the universe and becomes either
overwhelmed or terrified or depressed by it ending up feeling alienated from
everyday reality. Kierkegaard thought it was important to be capable of modulating
between the two extremes. Merleau Ponty was equally aware of the paradoxical
nature of human living and he firmly believed that we have to live with what amounts
to an essential ambiguity (Merleau Ponty 1945, 1968).

• The four dimensional force field
In this force field of opposites there are a number of different dimensions of
experience. Systematic descriptions of human experience have outlined four
dimensions. Heidegger spoke of the different dimensions as those of earth, world,
man, and gods (Heidegger 1957). Binswanger (1946,1963) spoke of the Umwelt
(environment), Mitwelt (world with others) and Eigenwelt (personal world), whilst a
spiritual dimension (Uberwelt) is also implied in his work (van Deurzen-Smith 1984).
In essence philosophers have recognized that human experience is multiple and
complex and takes place on a number of different levels. Firstly there is our
involvement in a physical world of objects, where we struggle between survival and

12

death. Secondly there is our activity in a social world of other people, where we
struggle with the contradictions between our need to belong and the possibility of our
isolation. Thirdly there is a personal dimension where we grapple with the tension
between integrity and disintegration. Finally there is a spiritual dimension where we
seek to find meaning against the threat of meaninglessness. On each of these
dimensions we have to learn to stand in the tension between opposites, discovering
that we cannot have life without death, love without hate, identity without confusion,
and wisdom without doubt. As Paul Tillich once said:
The courage of confidence takes the anxiety of fate as well as the anxiety of
guilt into itself (Tillich 1952:163).
CONCLUSION

• A dialectical approach.
Approaching psychotherapy from an existential perspective is to see that a
dialectical process manages all these tensions of human existence. Conflicts are
constantly generated and then overcome, only to be reasserted in a new form.
Paradoxes are inevitable and life flows out of contradictory forces working against
and with each other. The existential psychotherapist has as primary task to
recognize together with the client the specific tensions that are at work in the client’s
life. This requires a process of careful scrutiny and description of the client’s
experience and a gradually growing familiarity with the client’s particular situation
and stance in the world. To understand the worldview and the states of mind that
this generates is to grapple with the way the client makes meaning, which involves a
coming to know of clients’ values and beliefs. The particular circumstances of the
client’s life are recognized, as is their wider context. The psychotherapeutic process
of existential therapy is then to elicit, clarify and put into perspective all the current
issues and contradictions that are problematic. Part of the work consists in enabling
the client to come to terms with the inherent contradictions of human living. Another
part of it is to help clients find a satisfactory direction for their future life with a full
recognition of the paradoxes that have to be faced in the process. Ultimately the
therapeutic search is about allowing the client to reclaim personal freedom and a
willingness and ability to be open to the world in all its complexity. Authentic living
with courage (Tillich 1952) and in humility would be a suitable existential objective.
Learning to reflect for oneself and communicate effectively with others is another
(Buber 1923, 1929). As mentioned before existential psychotherapy can take many
different shapes and forms, but it always requires a philosophical exploration of what
is true for the client. When this exploration is conducted satisfactorily and fully it often
leads to a greater recognition of what is true for human beings in general, affording
the beginning of a genuinely philosophical stance, which may make it easier to tackle
life’s inevitable darkness and adversity. In time it may even lead to that elusive
objective of all philosophy that makes everything worthwhile, ordinary, hard earned,
human wisdom.

13

Bibliography
Achenbach B.G. (1984) Philosophische Praxis, Koln: Jurgen Dinter.
Binswanger, L. (1946) 'The Existential Analysis school of thought', in Existence, ed.
May, R., Angel, E., Ellenberger, H.F., (1958) New York, Basic Books.
Binswanger, L. (1963) Being-in-the-World, transl. Needleman J. New York: Basic
Books.
Boss M. (1988) Martin Heidegger's Zollikon Seminars, in: Hoeller K. (ed.) Review of
Existential Psychology and Psychiatry. Vol 16.
Boss, M. (1957) Psychoanalysis and Daseinsanalysis, transl. Lefebre J.B. New York:
Basic Books.
Boss, M. (1962) 'Anxiety, Guilt and Psychotherapeutic Liberation' Review of Existential
Psychology and Psychiatry, Vol 11, no.3, Sept.
Boss, M. (1979) Existential Foundations of Medicine and Psychology, New York, Jason
Aronson
Buber, M. (1923) I and Thou, Transl. Kaufman W., Edinburgh: T&T Clark, 1970.
Buber, M. (1929) Between Man and Man, Transl. Smith R.G., London: Kegan Paul,
1947.
Deurzen-Smith E. van (1988) Existential Counselling in Practice, London:Sage
Publications.
Deurzen-Smith E. van (1997) Everyday Mysteries: Existential Dimensions of
Psychotherapy, London: Routledge.
Deurzen-Smith E. van, (1992) in Dryden W. Hard-earned Lessons for Counselling in
Action, London: Sage Publications.
Deurzen-Smith, E. van (1984) Existential therapy. In Dryden, W. (ed.) Individual
Therapy in Britain. London: Harper and Row.
Frankl, V.E. (1946) Man’s Search for Meaning, London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1964.
Frankl, V.E. (1955) The Doctor and the Soul, New York: Knopf.
Frankl, V.E. (1967) Psychotherapy and Existentialism, Harmondsworth:Penguin.
Heidegger, M. (1927) Being and Time, Transl. Macquarrie J. and Robinson E.S.,
London: Harper and Row, 1962.
Heidegger, M. (1954, 1977) What is called Thinking?, trans. Scanlon J., The Hague,
Martinus Nijhoff.
Heidegger, M. (1957) Vorträge und Aufsätze, Pfullingen, Neske.
Hoogendijk A. (1991) Spreekuur bij een Filosoof, Utrecht: Veen.
Husserl, E. (1900) Logical Investigations, Transl. Findlay J.N., London: Routledge.
Husserl, E. (1913) Ideas, Transl. Boyce Gibson, W.R., New York: Macmillan.
Husserl, E. (1929) Cartesian Meditations, The Hague: Nijhoff 1960.
Husserl, E. (1925, 1977) Phenomenological Psychology, trans. Scanlon J., The Hague,
Nijhoff.
Jaspers, K. (1951 ) The Way to Wisdom: trans. Manheim R., New Haven:Yale
University Press.
Jaspers, K. (1963) General Psychopathology, Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.
Jaspers, K. (1964) The Nature of Psychotherapy, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Jaspers, K. (1971) Philosophy of Existence, transl. Grabau R. F., Oxford: Blackwell.

14

Kierkegaard S. 1844 The Concept of Anxiety Transl. Thomte R., Princeton, Princeton
University Press 1980.
Kierkegaard S. 1846 Concluding Unscientific Postscript Transl. Swenson D.F. and
Lowrie W., Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1941.
Kierkegaard S. (1855), The Sickness unto Death, Trans. Lowrie W., Princeton,
Princeton Univ. Press, 1941.
Kierkegaard, S. (1844, 1944) The Concept of Dread, trans. Lowrie W., Princeton,
Princeton University Press.
Kierkegaard, S. (1841) The Concept of Irony, Bloomington:Indiana University Press
1965.
Kierkegaard,S. (1967) Journals and Papers, Bloomington: Indian Univ. Press.
Lahav R. and Venza Tillmanns M. da (1995) Essays on Philosophical Counselling,
Lanham: Univ. Press of Maryland
Laing R.D. (1960) The Divided Self London: Tavistock Publications.
Laing R.D. (1967) The Politics of Experience London: Tavistock Publications.
Laing, R.D. (1961) Self and Others. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Laing, R.D. and Esterson, A. (1964) Sanity, Madness and the Family.
Harmondsworth:Penguin.
May, R., Angel, E., Ellenberger, H.F., (1958) Existence, New York: Basic Books.
May, R. (1969) Existential Psychology, New York: Random House.
May, R. (1983) The Discovery of Being, New York: Norton and Co.
Merleau Ponty, M. (1945) Phenomenology of Perception, Transl. Smith C., London:
Routledge.
Merleau Ponty, M. (1964) Sense and Non-Sense, Transl. Dreyfus H. and Dreyfus P.,
Evanston:Northwestern Univ. Press.
Merleau Ponty, M. (1968) The Visible and the Invisible, Transl. Lingis A., Evanston:
Northwestern Univ. Press.
Nietzsche F. (1886) Beyond Good and Evil. New York: Vintage, 1966.
Nietzsche F. (1887), On the Genealogy of Morals, Trans. Kaufman W. and Hollingdale
R.J. New York: Vintage Books 1969.
Nietzsche F. (1888), Twilight of the Idols, Trans. Hollingdale R.J., Harmondsworth:
Penguin 1969.
Nietzsche, F. (1878, 1986) Human All Too Human: A book for free spirits, trans.
Hollingdale R.J., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nietzsche, F. (1881, 1987) Daybreak: Thoughts on the prejudices of morality, trans.
Hollingdale R.J., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nietzsche, F. (1882, 1974) The Gay Science, trans. Kaufman W., New York: Vintage
Books.
Nietzsche, F. (1883) Thus spoke Zarathustra, transl. Tille A., New York: Dutton 1933
Nussbaum M.C. (1994) The Therapy of Desire: Theory and Practice in Hellenistic
Ethics, Princeton : Princeton University Press.
Sartre J.P. (1943), Being and Nothingness: An Essay on Phenomenological Ontology,
Trans. Barnes H., New York: Philosophical Library, 1956.
Sartre J.P. 1948 Anti-Semite and Jew, New York: Shocken Books.
Sartre, J.P. (1939, 1962) Sketch for a Theory of the Emotions, London: Methuen & Co.
Sartre, J.P. (1943b) No Exit, Transl. Gilbert S., New York: Knopf, 1947.
Szasz T.S. (1961) The Myth of Mental Illness, NewYork: Hoeber-Harper

15

Szasz T.S. (1965) The Ethics of Psychoanalysis: The Theory and Method of
Autonomous Psychotherapy, Syracuse, N.Y.: Syracuse University Press (1988)
Szasz T.S. (1992) Taking Dialogue as Therapy seriously. In: Journal of the Society for
Existential Analysis, London: vol 3.
Tillich P. (1952) The Courage to Be, Newhaven: Yale Univ. Press
Tillich P. (1954) Love, Power and Justice, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Vlastos G. (1991) Socrates: Ironist and Moral Philosopher, Cambridge: Cambridge
Univ. Press.
Yalom, I. (1980) Existential Psychotherapy, New York: Basic Books
Yalom, I. (1989) Love’s Executioner and Other Tales of Psychotherapy, London:
Bloomsbury Publications.

16

